The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifty Salads, by Thomas Jefferson Murrey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Fifty Salads

Author: Thomas Jefferson Murrey

Release Date: February 8, 2008 [EBook #24542]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY SALADS ***




Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                        FIFTY SALADS


                             BY

                      THOMAS J. MURREY,

 _Author of "Fifty Soups," "Valuable Cooking Recipes," Etc.
      Formerly professional Caterer of the Continental
           Hotel, Philadelphia, and Astor House,
                         New York._


                          [Device]


                          NEW YORK
                   WHITE, STOKES, & ALLEN
                         PUBLISHERS




 COPYRIGHT, 1885,
 BY WHITE, STOKES, & ALLEN.




CONTENTS.


 REMARKS ON SALADS,                 7
 BORAGE FOR SALADS,                 8
 PLAIN SALAD DRESSING,              9
 MAYONNAISE,                       10
 ANCHOVY SALAD,                    10
 ASPARAGUS SALAD,                  10
 BEANS, LIMA, SALAD OF,            11
 BEEF SALAD,                       11
 BEET LEAVES SALAD,                12
 BLOATER, YARMOUTH, SALAD OF,      12
 BREAKFAST SALAD,                  12
 BRUSSELS-SPROUTS SALAD,           13
 CARROT SALAD,                     13
 CAULIFLOWER SALAD,                13
 CELERIAC SALAD,                   14
 CELERY SALAD,                     14
 CHERRY SALAD,                     15
 CHICORY SALAD,                    15
 CHICKEN SALAD,                    15
 CODFISH (SALT) SALAD,             17
 CORN SALAD, OR FETTICUS,          17
 CRAB SALAD,                       17
 CRAY-FISH SALAD,                  18
 CRESS SALAD,                      18
 CUCUMBER SALAD,                   19
 CURRANT SALAD,                    19
 DANDELION SALAD,                  19
 DUMAS SALAD,                      20
 EELS, MAYONNAISE OF,              20
 EGG SALAD,                        21
 ENDIVE SALAD,                     21
 ESCAROLE SALAD,                   21
 FROG SALAD,                       22
 HERBS FOR SALADS,                 22
 HERRING SALAD,                    23
 HOP SALAD,                        23
 ITALIAN SALAD,                    24
 LAMB SALAD,                       24
 LETTUCE SALAD,                    25
 LOBSTER SALAD,                    25
 MELON SALAD,                      26
 MINT SALAD,                       26
 ORANGE SALADS,                    26
 OYSTER SALAD,                     27
 PIGEON SALAD,                     27
 PINEAPPLE SALAD,                  27
 POTATO SALAD,                     28
 PRAWN SALAD,                      28
 RABBIT SALAD,                     29
 SALMON SALADS,                    29
 SARDINE SALAD,                    30
 SCOLLOP SALAD,                    30
 TOMATO SALAD,                     31

 E. C.'S SALAD DRESSING,           31
 S. F.'S SHRIMP SALAD,             32




REMARKS ON SALADS.


Of the many varieties of food daily consumed, none are more important
than a salad, rightly compounded. And there is nothing more exasperating
than an inferior one. The salad is the Prince of the Menu, and although
a dinner be perfect in every other detail except the salad, the affair
will be voted a failure if that be poor. It is therefore necessary for
those contemplating dinner-giving, to personally overlook the
preparation of the salad if they wish favorable criticism.

To become a perfect salad-maker, do not attempt too much at first;
practise on plain salads and plain dressings before you try combination
salads, fancy dressings, and elaborate garnishings, and you will soon
become proficient in the art. Do not prepare plain salads until the
moment they are wanted at table. Should they be mixed long before they
are served, you will find the lettuce flabby and the dressing watery and
insipid.

The importance of using none but the purest condiments must not be
overlooked, for a perfect salad cannot be made with inferior
ingredients. Garnishing or decorating salads presents an opportunity for
displaying artistic taste and judgment. The most deliciously blended
salad will not be appreciated unless it is attractive in appearance. No
exact rule can be laid down for garnishing; much depends on the judgment
and good taste of the salad maker. Original ideas are commendable. Wild
flowers neatly arranged with alternate tufts of green are very pretty
during warm weather. During cold weather garnish with pretty designs cut
from beets, turnips, radishes, celery, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

BORAGE FOR SALADS.--This is an excellent ingredient in nearly all
vegetable salads. Cover a champagne-bottle with raw cotton or heavy,
coarse flannel; fasten it with thread; set the bottle in a soup-plate,
and pour warm water over it. Soak a handful of borage seeds in warm
water for fifteen minutes; drain, and work them into the flannel around
the bottle, as evenly as possible. Place the bottle and soup-plate in a
warm, dark place until the seeds sprout; then bring it to the light.
Keep water in the plate constantly. When the shoots are a few inches
long, trim them off, as wanted, and add them to any salad with a plain
dressing.

PLAIN SALAD DRESSING is admissible with nearly all salads. It is
composed of oil, vinegar, pepper, and salt, and nothing else. Many who
do not care particularly for oil, use equal quantities of oil and
vinegar, others one-third vinegar to two-thirds oil; these proportions
satisfy a large class, but four parts of oil to one of vinegar are about
the right proportions, provided the vinegar is of the best.

The plain dressing is made in two ways, either mixed in a bowl and the
salad added to it, or as follows: Take a tablespoon and put in it
(holding it over the salad) one saltspoonful of salt, one-fourth this
quantity of freshly ground pepper, and a tablespoonful of oil; mix and
add to the salad. Add three more tablespoonfuls of oil; toss the salad
lightly for a few seconds; lastly, add a tablespoonful of sharp
vinegar; toss the salad again, and serve.

MAYONNAISE.--When preparing a mayonnaise in summer keep the bowl as cold
as possible. Beat up the yolks of two raw eggs to a smooth consistency,
add two saltspoonfuls of salt and one of white pepper, and a
tablespoonful of oil. Beat up thoroughly, and by degrees add half a pint
of oil. When it begins to thicken add a few drops of vinegar. The total
amount of vinegar to be used is two tablespoonfuls, and the proper time
to stop adding oil, and to add drops of vinegar, is when the dressing
has a glassy look instead of a velvet appearance. After a few trials
almost any one can make a mayonnaise, as it is very simple.

ANCHOVY SALAD.--Wash, skin, and bone eight salted anchovies; soak them
in water for an hour; drain and dry them. Cut two hard-boiled eggs into
slices. Arrange the leaves of a head of lettuce neatly in a salad-bowl
and add the anchovies and the eggs. Prepare a plain dressing in a
soup-plate, pour it over the salad and serve. The fish may be minced,
chopped, or cut into fillets.

ASPARAGUS SALAD.--Remove the binding round a bunch of asparagus, cut off
an inch of the root end of each stalk, scrape off the outside skin,
wash them, tie them in bunches containing six to eight each, and boil,
if possible, with the heads standing just out of the water, as the
rising steam will cook them sufficiently. If covered with water the
heads are cooked before the root ends. When tender, plunge them into
cold water, drain, arrange them on a side dish, pour over them a plain
dressing, and serve.

BEANS, LIMA, SALAD OF.--Boil one pint of lima beans for forty minutes in
water slightly salted; drain; put them in a salad-bowl, and add three
hot, boiled potatoes cut into slices. Mince a stalk of celery; sprinkle
it over the vegetables. Prepare a plain dressing, pour it over the
salad, and set the bowl in the ice-box; when cold, serve. A little cold,
boiled tongue may be added if liked.

BEEF SALAD.--Cut into neat pieces, an inch in length, half a pound of
boiled fresh beef. Take two heads of crisp lettuce, reject the outside
leaves, wipe the small leaves separately, place them in a salad-bowl,
add the beef. Chop up a sweet Spanish pepper, add a tablespoonful to the
salad. Prepare a plain dressing, pour it over the salad; just before
serving, mix gently.

BEET LEAVES SALAD.--The seed-leaves of the beet were preferred by the
Greeks to lettuce. They are served the same as lettuce. If a little old,
scald them in hot water a moment. Swiss chard is the midrib of the beet
leaf. Remove the leaves, cut the midribs into equal lengths, tie in
small bunches, boil thirty minutes. Arrange on a side dish, pour over
them a plain dressing and serve either hot or cold.

BLOATER, YARMOUTH, SALAD OF.--Take two whole fish from the can. Remove
skin and bone, and cut them into pieces an inch square. Cut up three
stalks of celery into inch pieces and each piece into strips; place
these in a salad-bowl and add the fish. Chop up three salt anchovies
with a dozen capers into very small pieces; strew over the salad; add a
plain dressing and toss lightly before serving.

BREAKFAST SALAD.--Scald two ripe tomatoes; peel off the skin, and place
them in ice-water; when very cold, slice them. Peel and slice very thin
one small cucumber. Put four leaves of lettuce into a salad-bowl, add
the tomatoes and cucumber. Cut up one spring onion; add it, and, if
possible, add four or five tarragon leaves. Now add a plain dressing and
serve.

BRUSSELS-SPROUTS SALAD.--Pick over carefully a quart of sprouts, wash
well, and boil rapidly for twenty minutes (if boiled slowly they lose
their color). Drain, and plunge them into cold water. Drain again, and
put them into a salad-bowl. Mince one-fourth of a pound of boiled ham,
arrange it neatly and evenly around the sprouts, and around this arrange
a border of potato salad. Add a plain dressing, a teaspoonful of herbs,
and serve.

CARROT SALAD.--The young spring carrots are excellent when served as a
salad. Take six of them, wash, wipe them with a coarse towel, boil them
for ten minutes, drain and cut into narrow strips. Arrange neatly in the
centre of a salad-bowl; cut up half a pound of cold boiled mutton into
neat pieces; put it around the carrots. Mince a stalk of celery with a
few tarragon leaves; strew over the dish; add a plain dressing and
serve.

CAULIFLOWER SALAD.--Put into a basin of cold water a head of
cauliflower, head downward, add half a teaspoonful of salt, and a
wineglass of vinegar. Let stand for half or three-fourths of an hour,
drain, and put it into a saucepan to boil until tender. The length of
time for boiling depends upon the size of the head. Remove the scum
carefully as it rises, or it will discolor the cauliflower. When done
separate the sprigs, and arrange them around the bowl, heads outward.
Put into the centre of the dish a head of cabbage-lettuce, cover it with
red mayonnaise (_see Lobster Salad_), and sprinkle a few capers on top.
Mask the cauliflower with mayonnaise, garnish with beet diamonds, and
the effect is very pleasing.

CELERIAC SALAD.--Celeriac, or turnip-rooted celery, is an excellent
vegetable for the gouty and the rheumatic. When stewed and served with
cream sauce, it is at its best. It may be used in salads either raw or
boiled. If used raw, cut it into very thin slices; if cooked, cut it
into inch pieces. Mix with it endive, potato, and a little boiled
tongue, in equal proportions; serve with a plain dressing.

CELERY SALAD.--With the exception of lettuce, celery is more generally
used as a salad in this country than any other plant.

Cut off the root end of three heads of celery; wipe each leaf-stalk
carefully, and cut them into inch pieces. Cut each piece into strips,
put them into a salad-bowl, add a plain mayonnaise, and serve.

CHERRY SALAD.--Remove the stones from a quart of fine, black ox-heart
cherries. Place them into a compote, dust powdered sugar over them, and
add half a wineglassful each of sherry and curaçoa. Just before serving
mix lightly.

CHICORY SALAD.--Thoroughly wash and drain two heads of chicory; cut away
the green leaves and use them for garnishing, or boil them as greens.
Cut off the root-end from the bleached leaves, and put the latter into a
salad-bowl that has been rubbed with a clove of garlic. Add half a dozen
tarragon leaves, four to six tablespoonfuls of oil, a saltspoonful of
white pepper, and two saltspoonfuls of salt. Mix thoroughly. Now add a
tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar, and you have a delightful salad.

CHICKEN SALAD.--The average cook book contains a good deal of nonsense
about this salad. Nothing can be more simple than to mix a little nicely
cut cold boiled chicken and celery together, with a tablespoonful or two
of mayonnaise. Put this mixture into a salad-bowl, arrange it neatly,
and over all add a mayonnaise. Garnish with celery tops, hard-boiled
eggs, strips of beets, etc. Use a little more celery than chicken. Or,
tear a few leaves of lettuce, put them in a salad-bowl, and add half a
cold, boiled, tender chicken that has been cut into neat pieces; pour
over it a mayonnaise; garnish neatly, and serve.

For large parties, and when the chicken is apt to become dry, from
having been cut up long before it is wanted, it is best to keep it moist
by adding a plain dressing. Drain it before using. Put on a flat
side-dish a liberal bed of crisp lettuce. Add the chicken, garnish
neatly, and, just before sending to table, pour over it a mayonnaise.

If in hot weather, arrange the salad on a dish that will stand in a
small tub or kid. Fill this with ice, place the dish on top, pin a
napkin or towel around the tub to hide it from view. Flowers, smilax,
etc., may be pinned on this, which produce a very pretty effect.

In ancient times the fairest and youngest lady at table was expected to
prepare and mix the salad with her fingers. "_Retourner la salade les
doigts_," is the French way of describing a lady to be still young and
beautiful.

CODFISH (SALT) SALAD.--Take three pieces of codfish two inches square;
split them in two, and soak them in water over night. Change the water
twice, next day drain and wipe dry. Baste each piece with a little
butter, and broil (they make a very nice breakfast dish, served with
drawn butter). When cool, tear them apart, and cover with a plain salad
dressing; let stand for two hours. Half fill a salad-bowl with crisp
lettuce leaves; drain the fish and add it to the lettuce; add
mayonnaise; garnish with lemon-peel rings, hard-boiled eggs, etc., and
serve.

CORN SALAD, OR FETTICUS.--Carefully pick over two quarts of fetticus;
reject all damaged leaves; wash, and dry in a napkin. Place in a
salad-bowl; add a pint of minced celery and two hard-boiled eggs,
chopped fine; finally add a plain dressing, toss, and serve.

CRAB SALAD.--Boil three dozen hard-shell crabs for twenty-five minutes.
Let them cool, then remove the top shell and tail; quarter the
remainder, and pick out the meat carefully with a nut-picker or kitchen
fork. The large claws should not be forgotten, for they contain a dainty
morsel; the fat that adheres to the top shell should not be overlooked.
Cut up an amount of celery equal in bulk to the crab meat; mix both
together with a few spoonfuls of plain salad dressing; then put it in a
salad-bowl. Mask it with a mayonnaise; garnish with crab-claws, shrimps,
and hard-boiled eggs, alternated with tufts of green, such as parsley,
etc.

CRAY-FISH SALAD.--Cray-fish (or craw-fish) resemble small lobsters; they
are excellent as a salad, and are extensively used in garnishing fish
salads. Boil two dozen cray-fish for fifteen minutes in water slightly
salted; break the shells in two; pick out the tail part of each; cut it
in two lengthwise; remove the black ligament. Put into a salad-bowl the
small white leaves of a head of cabbage-lettuce; add the fish; pour over
them a mayonnaise. Garnish with the head part of the shells, tufts of
green, and hard-boiled eggs.

CRESS SALAD.--Cress is one of our best spring salads. Pick the leaves
over carefully, removing the bruised leaves and all large stems. Mince a
young spring onion; strew it over the cress, add a plain dressing, and
serve.

CUCUMBER SALAD.--If properly prepared, cucumbers are not apt to
interfere with digestion. They should be gathered early in the morning
and kept in a cool place until wanted. After peeling, slice them _very_
thin; sprinkle a little salt over them; let stand ten minutes, and add
cayenne, and equal parts of oil and vinegar. If allowed to remain in
salt water any length of time, if oil is omitted, or if their natural
juices are squeezed out of them, they become indigestible.

CURRANT SALAD.--Put a pint of red currants in the centre of a compote.
Around them make a border of a pint of white currants, and around these
arrange a border of red raspberries. Set the dish on the table. Take a
pint of sweet cream, add to it three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar;
stir it up to dissolve the sugar; while doing so add a tablespoonful
each of brandy and curaçoa. Set the sauce on the table; dish up the
fruit; and let each guest help himself to the sauce.

DANDELION SALAD.--A dandelion salad is one of the healthiest of spring
salads. Take two quarts of freshly gathered dandelions; wash them well;
pick them over carefully; let stand in water over night, as this
improves them. Drain, and dry in a napkin; place them in a salad-bowl;
add two young spring onions, minced. Serve with a plain dressing.

DUMAS SALAD (Devised by Alexandre Dumas).--"Put in a salad-bowl a yolk
of egg boiled hard; add a tablespoonful of oil, and make a paste of it;
then add a few stalks of chervil chopped fine, a teaspoonful each of
tunny and anchovy paste, a little French mustard, a small pickled
cucumber chopped fine, the white of the egg chopped fine, and a little
soy. Mix the whole well with two tablespoonfuls of wine vinegar; then
add two or three steamed potatoes sliced, a few slices of beet, same of
celeriac, same of rampion, salt and Hungarian pepper to taste; toss
gently twenty minutes, then serve."

EELS, MAYONNAISE OF.--Put into a salad-bowl two heads of bleached
endive, each leaf having been previously examined. Take six pieces of
potted eels about two inches long; remove the bone; break the eels into
neat pieces, and arrange them on the endive; add a mayonnaise, garnish,
and serve.

EGG SALAD.--Put into a salad-bowl the small crisp leaves of a head of
lettuce; add four hard-boiled eggs sliced. Mince a dozen capers;
sprinkle over the eggs, and add a plain dressing.

ENDIVE SALAD.--The curled endive is excellent for fall and winter
salads. Pick the leaves over carefully; separate the green from the
white; put the latter into a salad-bowl; add minced salad herbs, and a
suspicion of onion. Serve with plain dressing.

ESCAROLE SALAD.--This is one of the best salads known. Serve it as
follows: Take two heads of escarole; reject all green and decayed
leaves; place the white bleached leaves in a salad-bowl, after being
thoroughly washed and dried in a napkin; take a small piece of crust of
bread, and a clove of garlic, dip the garlic in salt and rub it a few
times on the bread; add the piece of bread to the salad-bowl. Next add
half a teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoonful of pepper, and four
tablespoonfuls of the very best olive oil; toss the salad gently; then
add a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar; toss again; remove the piece of
crust, which is known as "Chapon," and serve. Escarole is the
broad-leaved variety of the well-known _endive_.

FROG SALAD.--This is a delicious salad. Soak two dozen frogs' legs in
salt water for one hour; drain; stew them slowly until quite tender;
take them out of the boiling water and cover them with milk. Let this
come to a boil; drain and cool; remove the bones. Cut up celery enough
to half fill a salad-bowl; add the frogs which should nearly fill the
bowl. Arrange neatly; cover with mayonnaise; garnish with lobster-claws,
little tufts of shrimps, and green herbs, alternated with hard-boiled
eggs quartered lengthwise.

HERBS FOR SALADS.--The most important desideratum (except possibly pure
condiments) in the art of salad making, is those little salad herbs that
to many appear insignificant, but to the epicure perfect a salad. All
travellers tell us that French salads are far superior to the salads of
other countries; but without fragrant herbs the French salads would be
as insipid as those of England. I strongly advise my readers to
cultivate a taste for these precious little herbs: Tarragon, borage,
chervil, chives, and pimpernel.

HERRING SALAD.--Soak four salt Holland herrings in water or milk for
three hours; then remove the skin and back-bone and cut them into neat
square pieces. Slice two quarts of boiled potatoes; while hot, put them
into a dish and pour over them Rhine wine enough to moisten them; when
cold add the herring and the yolks of four hard-boiled eggs, chopped up.
Crush a dozen pepper corns in a napkin, with a knife-handle, add to the
salad and mix all together. If milt herring are used, pound the milt to
a paste, moisten with vinegar, add to the salad. If roe herring are
used, soak the roe in vinegar for a few minutes and strew the eggs over
the salad. If the herrings have been soaked too long a little salt
should be added. The above is a true herring salad, though some add a
little oil, but the majority prefer it as above directed.

HOP SALAD.--Hop-sprouts are not only wholesome but are a most excellent
vegetable. In hop-growing districts the surplus sprouts are thrown away.
This is an error. Gather the sprouts before the heads develop, soak them
for half an hour in water slightly salted; drain; boil for ten minutes,
and serve them with a plain salad dressing. They may be eaten either
hot or cold.

ITALIAN SALAD.--Nearly all mixed vegetable salads that contain various
ingredients may be safely called _à l'Italienne_, for all culinary odds
and ends are made into salads by these thrifty people, and it must not
for an instant be supposed that the different items are thrown
indifferently together. On the contrary, they study the all-important
problem of how to first please the eye, so that their gastronomic effort
may more easily please the palate. A salad of eight or ten ingredients
is usually arranged on a round plate, wheel fashion, with half of a
hard-boiled egg, cut crosswise, to represent a hub. When only five
ingredients are used, the salad takes the forms of stars or other shapes
as fancy dictates. They are usually served with plain salad dressing.

LAMB SALAD.--In hot weather this salad is very acceptable. Put into a
salad-bowl the crisp small centre leaves of two heads of cabbage
lettuce. Cut up three-fourths of a pound of cold roast lamb, add to the
lettuce. Chop up a dozen capers with a few tarragon leaves; strew over
the salad; serve with a plain salad dressing.

LETTUCE SALAD.--Take two good sized heads of the broad- or long-leaved
varieties of lettuce; separate the leaves; wipe them carefully to remove
all grit; break or tear each leaf apart (do not cut lettuce); put them
in a salad-bowl; add oil, pepper, and salt, and a teaspoonful of chopped
herbs; toss lightly. Now add the vinegar, toss again, and serve
immediately.--For proportions see Plain Salad Dressing.

LOBSTER SALAD.--Take two live hen or female lobsters; boil them thirty
minutes; drain. When cold, break them apart; crack the claws, and if the
tail fins are covered with eggs remove them carefully. Take out the sand
pouch found near the head, split the fleshy part of the tail in two
lengthwise, remove the small long entrail found therein. Adhering to the
body-shell may be found a layer of creamy fat, save this, and also the
green fat in the body of the lobster (called Tom Alley by New
Englanders) and the coral. If celery is used, tear the lobster into
shreds with forks; if lettuce, cut the lobster into half inch pieces;
place the salad herb in a bowl, add the lobster and the fat; and pour
over it a rich mayonnaise; garnish with the claws and heads, tufts of
green, hard-boiled eggs, etc. The lobster eggs may be separated and
sprinkled over the mayonnaise. The coral is used for coloring
mayonnaise, and also butter, which is then used in decorating salmon and
other dark fish, used in salads.

MELON SALAD.--The best way to eat a melon is unquestionably with a
little salt, but melons are very deceptive, they may look delicious, but
from growing in the same field with squashes and other vegetables they
often taste insipid. Such may be made quite palatable in salads. Cut the
melon into strips; then remove the skin; cut the eatable part into
pieces, and send to table with a plain dressing.

MINT SALAD.--This is an egg salad with the addition of six leaves of
mint chopped fine, serve with a plain dressing, and with or after cold
roast lamb.

ORANGE SALADS.--Peel and slice three oranges that have been on ice.
Remove the seeds, arrange the slices in a compote, cover with powdered
sugar, and add two tablespoonfuls each of maraschino, curaçoa, and
brandy. Let it stand an hour in the ice-box before serving. Or, arrange
in a dish a neat border of cold boiled rice. Peel and divide into
sections three Florida oranges; put the oranges in the centre; dust
powdered sugar over all, and set the dish in the ice-box. Just before
serving pour over the salad two wineglassfuls of arrack. A plain salad
dressing is served with orange salad in some places in the East, but
would not suit the American palate.

OYSTER SALAD.--Boil two dozen small oysters for five minutes in water
enough to cover them; add a little salt and a tablespoonful of vinegar;
drain and cool. Put into a salad-bowl the centre leaves of two heads of
cabbage lettuce, add the oysters whole, pour over them a mayonnaise;
garnish with oyster-crabs, hard-boiled eggs, and, if liked, a few
anchovies cut into fillets.

PIGEON SALAD.--Wild pigeons are at times so plentiful that they can be
purchased for 75 cents per dozen. They are usually served broiled,
roasted, or in pies; but pigeon salad is a very dainty dish. Take equal
parts of celery and roasted pigeon; arrange neatly, with mayonnaise;
garnish and serve.

PINEAPPLE SALAD.--Peel and dig out the eyes of two very ripe pineapples.
Take hold of the crown of the pine with the left hand; take a fork in
the right hand and with it tear the pine into shreds until there is
nothing left but the core, which throw away. Place the shredded fruit
lightly in a compote. Take half a pint of white sugar syrup; add to it a
wineglassful of arrack, a tablespoonful of brandy, and one of curaçoa.
Mix and pour over the pines. Set in ice-box. When cold, serve.

POTATO SALAD.--Cut up into slices two quarts of boiled potatoes _while
hot_; add to them a teaspoonful each of chopped onion and parsley; pour
over them a liberal quantity of plain salad dressing. If the potatoes
should then appear too dry, add a little hot water, or better still,
soup stock; toss lightly so as not to break the slices; then place the
salad on ice to become cold. Serve by placing a leaf of lettuce on each
small plate, and add two tablespoonfuls of the potato to the lettuce,
for each person. Cold boiled potatoes do not make a good potato salad.

PRAWN SALAD.--These dainties can always be obtained in Fulton Market,
cooked and shelled. Take one quart of prawns and one quart and a pint of
cut celery; put the celery in a bowl; add the prawns; garnish neatly and
serve with a mayonnaise.

RABBIT SALAD.--Rabbits are always cheap and good, from November to
January, and should be enjoyed by the poor as well as the rich. Cut up
the flesh of two roasted rabbits into neat pieces; place them in a bowl
and cover with a plain dressing; add a teaspoonful of minced salad
herbs; let stand for four hours. Put into a salad-bowl the leaves of
three hearts of cabbage lettuce; drain the meat, and add to the lettuce.
Put into a soup plate a teaspoonful of French mustard; thin it with a
tablespoonful of the dressing drained from the meat, and gradually add
to this a pint of mayonnaise, then pour it over the salad.

SALMON SALADS.--Broil two salmon steaks; when done break the fish into
flakes and add to it a little salt, pepper, and two tablespoonfuls of
lemon juice. Let stand for an hour. Half fill a salad-bowl with lettuce;
add the fish, and garnish with hard-boiled eggs, stoned olives, and a
few spiced oysters.

No. 2.--Put into a salad-bowl three stalks of celery, sliced; add half a
pound of canned salmon; arrange neatly; add mayonnaise; garnish and
serve.

No. 3.--Boil a six-pound salmon, whole; when done and cold place it on
a long fish-platter; prepare a red mayonnaise (see Lobster Salad); fill
a paper cornucopia with the sauce and squeeze it through the small end
over the fish in waves, to represent scales. Garnish with the small
centre hearts of lettuce, hard-boiled eggs, cray-fish, and little mounds
of shrimps or oyster crabs.

SARDINE SALAD.--Wash the oil from six sardines, remove skin and bone and
pour a little lemon juice over them. Put into a salad-bowl the leaves of
a head of crisp lettuce; add the fish. Chop up two hard-boiled eggs, add
to the fish, and serve with a plain dressing. Some do not approve of the
washing process, but one of the principal reasons why Americans dislike
oil is the fact that they first tasted it on sardines with which a poor
fish-oil is generally used, and the reason that the trade in sardines
has fallen off, is owing to the poor oil used in the canning of these
otherwise dainty fish.

SCOLLOP SALAD.--Soak twenty-five scollops in salt water for half an
hour; rinse them in cold water and boil twenty minutes; drain. Cut them
into thin slices; mix with an equal quantity of sliced celery; cover
with mayonnaise, garnish, and serve.

TOMATO SALAD.--A perfect tomato salad is prepared as follows: Take three
fine ripe August tomatoes and scald them a moment; skin, and set on ice
to cool; slice; put them into a salad-bowl; add a teaspoonful of chopped
tarragon and a plain salad dressing. Sliced tomatoes with mayonnaise are
not to be despised.

       *       *       *       *       *

E. C.'s Salad Dressing.

Pour one pint of boiling water into a farina boiler; add six
tablespoonfuls of vinegar; place on the stove. Beat six eggs lightly.
Mix, with a little cold water, two tablespoonfuls of mustard, two
teaspoonfuls of salt, a pinch of cayenne pepper, and one heaping
tablespoonful of corn-starch.

Beat this mixture up with the eggs, and stir it very slowly into the
boiling water and vinegar, after having removed the latter from the
stove--in order to prevent possibility of curdling. Return to the stove;
stir constantly until quite thick. Remove from the stove, and add
immediately half a pound of butter; stir until the butter is thoroughly
melted. Now put the yolks of two eggs on a plate, and, using a fork,
mix gradually with them half a pint of olive-oil, stirring it in
vigorously. When the first mixture is cold, beat the second into it. If
more oil is desired, the yolk of another egg must be mixed with it.

This recipe will make about one quart of dressing. If less is wished,
part of the first mixture can be saved in a cool place, and can be used
later by making a fresh supply of the olive-oil mixed with yolk of egg.

S. F.'S SHRIMP SALAD.--Boil a quart of fresh shrimps for twenty minutes.
Open and throw away the shells. Take the crisp leaves of a head of
lettuce, and place in a salad-bowl with two fresh tomatoes peeled and
sliced. Add the shrimps and pour over all a mayonnaise--red, if
convenient--and serve.




_BLANK PAGES_ FOR ADDITIONAL RECIPES.




COOKERY BOOKS.

_By_ THOMAS J. MURREY, _formerly professional caterer of the Astor
House, New York; Continental Hotel, Philadelphia; and other leading
hotels._

       *       *       *       *       *

FIFTY SOUPS.

    Containing much valuable information concerning soups and
    soup-making, and fifty recipes for soups of all kinds, simple and
    elaborate.

"One of the most charming little cook books recently
published."--_Christian Union._


FIFTY SALADS.

    Contains fifty recipes for salads and several for salad dressings,
    etc., as well as remarks upon salad-making, salad herbs, etc.

"A practical _chef_, Mr. Murrey brings to his volume the experience
of many years in the leading kitchens of New York, and his recipes
are those which have made the reputation of several famous
restaurants."--_Domestic Monthly._


BREAKFAST DAINTIES.

    With many valuable hints and directions concerning breakfast breads,
    fruits, beverages and dainty dishes. Mr. Murrey's own recipes.

     _Each one of the above is attractively printed on fine laid
       paper. Covers in colors, with original design, 16mo.,
       boards,_                                        _50 cts._
     _Cloth, design in gold and color,_                _75 cts._

       *       *       *       *       *

VALUABLE COOKING RECIPES.

    A large collection of economical recipes personally tested by Mr.
    Murrey, forming a cook book of the best character.

     _12mo., 128 pages, cloth, neat stamping in gold and
       color,_                                         _75 cts._

_Any of these books can be had of your bookseller, or will be delivered
at any address at publishers' expense, on receipt of advertised price._

       *       *       *       *       *

 WHITE, STOKES, & ALLEN,
 PUBLISHERS,
 182 Fifth Avenue, New York City.




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings have been retained.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifty Salads, by Thomas Jefferson Murrey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY SALADS ***

***** This file should be named 24542-8.txt or 24542-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/5/4/24542/

Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
