The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wreck on the Andamans, by Joseph Darvall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Wreck on the Andamans

Author: Joseph Darvall

Release Date: March 22, 2009 [EBook #28388]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK ON THE ANDAMANS ***




Produced by Sam W. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









                     THE WRECK
                         ON
                   THE ANDAMANS:

                       BEING

  A NARRATIVE OF THE VERY REMARKABLE PRESERVATION,
     AND ULTIMATE DELIVERANCE, OF THE SOLDIERS
   AND SEAMEN, WHO FORMED THE SHIPS' COMPANIES OF
     THE RUNNYMEDE AND BRITON TROOP-SHIPS, BOTH
  WRECKED ON THE MORNING OF THE 12TH OF NOVEMBER,
     1844, UPON ONE OF THE ANDAMAN ISLANDS, IN
                 THE BAY OF BENGAL.


          _TAKEN FROM AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS_

                         BY

                JOSEPH DARVALL, Esq.


                _At the request of_
  CAPT. CHARLES INGRAM, AND CAPT. HENRY JOHN HALL,
             _Owners of the Runnymede._


        "The dangers of the sea,
        All the cares and all the fears,
        When the stormy winds do blow."

                        (_Song._)


      LONDON: PELHAM RICHARDSON, 23, CORNHILL.
                       1845.




PELHAM RICHARDSON, PRINTER, 23, CORNHILL.




PREFACE.


The Author, owing to circumstances, has had access to authentic
documents and facts, relating to one of the most remarkable shipwrecks
which have ever happened, that of the troop-ships Runnymede and
Briton, on the morning of the 12th of November, 1844, upon one of the
Andaman Islands.

In reading these, it struck him forcibly, that the circumstances, if
thrown into the shape of a narrative, would form not only an
interesting publication, but would serve as a monument of the cool
intrepidity and judicious presence of mind of British officers,
soldiers, and seamen, in a time of remarkable trial.

They also tend to illustrate in a very striking manner the correctness
of the classic and poetical description of the "dangers of the sea,"
contained in that passage of Scripture, which the Author has often
observed to be listened to with great interest, when read in its
course, in the churches of our seaports, and which, on that account,
he makes no apology for quoting in a work, not professedly religious.

"They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy their business in
great waters; these men see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in
the deep. For at his word the stormy wind ariseth, which lifteth up
the waves thereof. They are carried up to the heaven, and down again
to the deep: their soul melteth away because of the trouble. They reel
to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits'
end. So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivereth
them out of their distress. For he maketh the storm to cease: so that
the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they are at
rest; and so he bringeth them unto the haven where they would be."[A]

    [A] Psalm cvii., v. 23-30, Com. Pr. Book.

If this little work should answer the author's intention by proving
entertaining as well as instructive, he will feel that he has been
rewarded for the pains he has taken in compiling it.

    _Reading,_
        _July, 1845._




THE

WRECK ON THE ANDAMANS.




THE DEPARTURE.

    "O'er the smooth bosom of the faithless tides,
    Propelled by gentle gales, the vessel glides."

                        _Falconer._


The gallant Barque the Runnymede, of 507 tons burthen, commanded by
Captain William Clement Doutty, an experienced seaman, and the property
of Messrs. Hall & Co. and Ingram of Riches-court, Lime-street, London,
being a remarkably staunch river-built vessel of the A 1 or first class,
left Gravesend on the 20th of June, 1844, bound for Calcutta. She had
on board a general cargo and a crew of twenty-eight persons, including
officers. She also carried out, on account of the Honourable East India
Company, thirty-eight soldiers, with two women and one child, belonging
to Her Majesty's 10th Regiment of Foot, and also Captain Stapleton,
Ensigns Venables, Du Vernett, and Purcell, and one hundred and five
soldiers, ten women, and thirteen children, belonging to Her Majesty's
50th Regiment of Foot. The whole of the military were under the command
of Captain Stapleton; the medical officer was Mr. Bell, the surgeon of
the vessel.

Every thing proceeded in the same manner as is usual on voyages in the
same course, till they arrived south of the Tropics. The only casualty
they met with was the death of William Bryant, a private of the 10th,
on the 12th of July. He had suffered from sea-sickness ever since his
embarkation. His body was committed to the deep the same evening, with
the customary ceremonies. The principal amusements of the officers and
crew were fishing, shark-catching, booby and pigeon shooting, and
playing at backgammon. There were also on board the ship, books
provided for the use of those who were disposed to read. The hour of
dinner was four o'clock.

On arriving south of the Tropics, the wind, instead of backing to
the westward, blew almost constantly from the north-east and
east-north-east; and when it occasionally got to the westward of
north, it always fell light, contrary to the usual course; and so it
continued until it got to the westward, and then it freshened. In
consequence of the delay occasioned by this state of things, and
the near approach of the north-east monsoon, the captain, on the
21st of October, resolved to call at Penang, for the purpose of
taking in an additional supply of water and other necessaries. They
accordingly steered their course thither. On the 24th they saw the
Island of Sumatra, bearing east-north-east about eight leagues. On
the 26th, in the forenoon, they saw Pulo Rondo, bearing
east-south-east, and on the 29th, at half-past two o'clock in the
afternoon, the ship anchored in safety off Fort Cornwallis, in the
roads of Penang, or Pulo Penang, the word Pulo signifying an island.
Penang is sometimes called Prince of Wales's Island. It is on the
coast of Queda. Its capital is George Town. The East-India Company
first formed a settlement here in 1786.

At Penang they remained till Sunday, the 3d of November, busily
engaged in taking in sixty-one casks or about thirty tons of water,
and other necessaries, and various articles of merchandize on account
of cargo. They found lying here Her Majesty's ship Dido, commanded by
the Honourable Captain Keppel.

Immediately on the arrival of the Runnymede, Captain Doutty and Mr.
Bell, together with Captain Stapleton and Ensign Du Vernett, went on
shore, it being the duty of the latter to report themselves to the
proper authorities.

It was agreed, that after the parties had accomplished their business,
they should meet at the best hotel in the place and dine together.
This understanding led to the following entertaining incidents. On
landing, the parties stepped into palanquin-carriages. The Captain and
the Doctor went one way, and their military friends, another. After
finishing their business, the Captain and his companion went in quest
of their friends, desiring the Malay boy, who had charge of their
carriage, to take them to the hotel. The lad replied, "I stand," and
off they set. After a number of turns and windings, amongst most
beautiful scenery, they arrived in front of a very well planned house,
and were told by their conductor "this was house." They thought it
remarkable that a hotel should be in such a retired situation.
However, upstairs they ran, and sure enough they found their military
friends there.

They were congratulating them upon their good quarters, when a lady
appeared, to whom they were introduced as the lady of the commandant,
whose house it was, and were speedily convinced of their mistake,
which produced a hearty laugh. They then, by signs, tried to make
their palanquin-boys comprehend that it was a hotel they wanted, and
not a private house. These said they understood "Master," and away
they all four went towards the town. At a short distance from this the
boys stopped at another large building, which appeared more like a
hotel than the former. They questioned the lads as to this house, who
replied, "All right," so they entered. They met an old gentleman, who
requested them to pass into an inner room, where he introduced them to
Captain Keppel, who received them most kindly. Their introducer proved
to be Captain Quin, of Her Majesty's ship Minden, who was on his way
home on sick leave in the Dido, and the mansion proved to be the
Admiralty-house. Captain Keppel, with great kindness, invited the
party to a ball and supper, to be given by him on the following
evening, to the inhabitants of Penang, previously to his sailing for
England.

On leaving the Admiralty-house, the party were directed to a place
little better than a booth, and denominated by the natives a
punch-house, a name given to all low taverns in India, but which was
dignified with the name of "The Albion Hotel." In the only
sitting-room of this place they found the officers of the Dido at
dinner. Of this meal they would have been disappointed, had not those
gentlemen kindly invited them to partake of their fare, which
consisted principally of curries of various kinds. So poorly was the
place furnished that no two articles were alike; chairs, plates,
dishes, glasses, knives and forks, were all odd ones, of different
colours and sizes. The badness of this accommodation arises from the
circumstance that those who call at the island are hospitably
entertained, during their stay, at the houses of those residents to
whom they happen to be introduced. For this reason a good hotel cannot
be supported. After the dinner, which went off with a good deal of fun
and mirth, some of the party "chartered ponies for a cruise" in the
interior of the island. Penang is remarkable for piebald ponies.

The next evening the party from the Runnymede repaired to the
admiralty-house, pursuant to invitation, and were hospitably received
by Captain Keppel and his officers. There they met the whole of the
respectable inhabitants of the island, both civil and military, with
their families. The rooms were handsomely decorated, and dancing was
kept up with great spirit, enlivened by the harmonious strains of
Captain Keppel's private band. This was succeeded, at midnight, by a
champagne supper, which, for excellence, might have borne a comparison
with any civic entertainment in London. Between three and four in the
morning the ladies began to move off, and some of the youngsters, by
way of further amusement, sat down to a second supper. At daylight the
Dido was apeak, under all sails, and by eight o'clock, was leading
down the north channel with skysails set for Old England. Her captain
and officers carried with them the good wishes of all they left behind
at Penang.




THE WRECK.

    "The wind blew hard, the sea ran high,
    The dingy scud drove 'cross the sky,
    Down topsails, boys, the gale comes on,
    To strike top-gallant-yards they run."

                        _Dibdin._


At 9 o'clock, A. M., of Sunday, the 3d of November, 1844, the
Runnymede weighed from Penang-roads with a light southerly wind, and
made sail through the north channel. At noon the wind came in from
seaward. At midnight, on Monday the 4th, she was abreast of the Ladda
Islands, with a barque in company. On Friday, the 8th, the weather was
unsettled, with heavy rain. All the small sails were stored, and the
royal yards sent down. At noon the sun was obscured. Saturday, the
9th, the breeze increased, with every appearance of bad weather. Took
in the top-gallant sails, and reefed the topsails, and took in the jib
and spanker. At noon the sun was obscured. Sunday, 10th, the barometer
falling fast, with the gale increasing, close reefed the topsails. At
noon heavy gusts. The courses were taken in and furled. At 6 the
fore-topsail was taken in, and the ship hove-to under the main topsail
and the main trysail. All the sails were re-secured, the top-gallant
yards sent down, and everything prepared for the storm, which it was
evident was now approaching. At noon the sun was again obscured, the
latitude being, by log, 11° 6" north, and the longitude 96° 0" east.
The wind now blew a hurricane. The barometer was 29°, and falling. The
main-topsail was taken in, and the ship left under the main topsail
only. At half-past three the fore and main top-gallant masts were
blown away. The wind was south, and so very severe that the main
trysail was blown to atoms, and the ship was lying-to under bare
poles, and laying beautifully to the wind, with her helm amidship and
perfectly tight. The hurricane was accompanied with a deluge of rain.
At 4 P. M. the wind shifted to the south-east, and was blowing so
terrifically that all the hatches were obliged to be battened down,
the sea making a fair breach over the vessel. The starboard-quarter
boat was washed away. About half-past 6 P. M. there was a lull, and it
was nearly calm, the wind backing to the south-west, and the sea
became comparatively quiet. The barometer having fallen as low as
28° 45", the ship was kept away north by east, and the topsails
re-secured, portions of them having blown adrift. At 8 P. M. the wind
began to blow again, and within half an hour the hurricane was as
severe as before. The larboard-quarter boat was torn from the davits
and blown across the poop, carrying away the binnacle and crushing the
hencoops in its passage. At 9 P. M., the hurricane still increasing,
the foremast broke into three pieces, and carried away with it the
jib-boom, the main and mizen topmasts, the starboard cathead, and
mainyard, the main and mizen masts alone standing. At 10 P. M. the
wind and rain were so severe that the men could not hold on upon the
poop. The soldiers were engaged in baling the water out of their
quarters between decks, whither it had been forced down the hatches.
In other respects the ship was quite tight and free from leak, proving
herself to be a capital sea boat. The pumps being attended to drew
out the water which was forced down the hatches, mast-coats, and
topside forwards.

During the hurricane, numbers of land-birds were driven on board--a
case not uncommon during storms--and an owl and a hawk were observed
perched on the swinging table on the poop, without shewing any alarm
at the presence of the ship's company. It was not noticed what became
of them. This circumstance tended to shew the intensity of the tempest
on shore, which must have forced these birds out to sea, a distance
not much less than two hundred miles from any land.

_Monday, 11th._--The hurricane was equally severe, the wind
south-east, and the barometer as low as 28° 0". The gusts were so
terrific, mixed with drift and rain, that none of the people could
stand on the deck. Advantage was therefore taken of the lulls to draw
the ship out, and clear away the wreck of the masts. As the starboard
bower-anchor was hanging only by the shank-painter, and its stock,
which was of iron, was working into the ship's side, the chain-cable
was unshackled, and the anchor was cut away from the bows. At noon,
latitude, per log, 11° 6" north longitude 95° 20" east, the barometer
apparently rose a little. No observations had been able to be made
since the 7th. The hurricane was equally severe in gusts, and the ship
perfectly unmanageable from her crippled state, but rode all the time
like a sea-bird on the waves, notwithstanding the sea was apparently
running from every point of the compass. The crew observed a large
barque ahead of them which had lost its topmast and mainyard. They
feared at first that she would not go clear of them. Happily,
however, she drifted past ahead of them. This vessel afterwards proved
to have been the Briton, of which we shall presently have occasion to
speak. They also saw a brig to leeward, totally dismasted. From her
appearance it was judged that she must soon have foundered, and every
soul on board perished. At 4 in the afternoon the barometer fell to
27° 70", and Cummin's mineral sympiesometer left the index.

The hurricane was now most terrific; the part of the poop to leeward
and the cabin-doors and the skylights were literally torn away, and
every moment they expected the poop itself to be carried off. None but
those who have witnessed so awful a tempest at sea could form an idea
of the weight and destructive power of the wind, crushing and beating
every thing to pieces, as if it had been done with a heavy metallic
body. At 8 P. M. the soldiers and sailors could not stand at the
pumps, but were obliged to bale out the water from between decks.

_Tuesday, the 12th._--At the turn of the day the hurricane still
continued, and the rudder was gone. At 1 A. M. they felt the ship
strike, and gave themselves up for lost, expecting every moment to be
engulphed in the depths of the ocean.

But it pleased Him, whom the winds and the sea obey,

    "Who plants his footsteps in the sea,
    And rides upon the storm,"

to decree otherwise, and, at the moment of impending destruction, the
ship and all her inmates were saved.

After a short time, it was discovered that the ship was thrown on a
reef of rocks, and had bilged; and although the water entered her
through the holes which the rocks had made, and filled her up to the
lower beams, yet that it soon smothered, and, the bilge pieces keeping
her upright, she lay comparatively quiet. But being fearful that she
might beat over the reef into deep water, they let go the larboard
bower-anchor, and shortly afterwards found the water leaving her.
After this all hands fell asleep, being exhausted with fatigue and
hardship. Captain Doutty and the military gentlemen were in Captain
Stapleton's cabin, which was the only one habitable. Captain Doutty
felt too anxious to rest long, but lay watching whilst all was still,
except the beating of the waves and the rain on the poop. He then went
out in front of the poop. He could discern nothing but the surf
breaking heavily on and around his unfortunate vessel. He then lay
down again, wishing earnestly for the break of day.




THE DELIVERANCE.

    "The night is gone, and o'er the sea,
    The morning sun shines peacefully;
    Again 'tis calm, again 'tis still,
    Noiseless as gentle summer's rill."

                        _Anon._


At length the morning broke, which was to introduce the ship's
company, just rescued from a watery grave, to a new era in their
existence. With the daybreak the hurricane also began to break, and,
though it rained heavily, the barometer rose rapidly until it stood at
29° 45". The captain then beheld, to his great joy, the loom, or
land-mark of the shore, to leeward, rising like a black belt, above
the breakers. The land was an island, off the east coast of the Great
Andaman, in latitude 12° 1" north, and longitude about 93° 14" east.
The Andaman Islands, which are about eight in number, and covered with
trees, form a group at the entrance of the Bay of Bengal, and are near
750 miles from the Sand Heads at Calcutta, and twelve degrees from the
Equator. That on which the vessel was driven was in point of latitude
about the centre, and may be easily known by a remarkable hill
somewhat resembling a puritan's hat, and being placed in a hollow of
the land, with much higher hills, both on the north and south of it.
The anchorage is good, and a ship may be sheltered from all points.

  [Illustration: Hullmandel & Walton Lithographers.
    No. 1.
      THE POSITION OF THE SHIPS, AT DAYBREAK, MORNING, 12TH. NOVEMBER]

About 60 years ago an attempt was made on the part of the East-India
Company to form a settlement on the Andaman Islands for the
convenience of shipping. Their first settlement was called Port
Chatham, on the South Andaman. But, after about a year or two, it
was removed thence, on account of its unhealthiness, to the North
Andaman, where it was named Port Cornwallis, after Admiral Cornwallis,
who recommended the removal, and not long after that was finally
broken up, and the islands abandoned.

The ship being nearly dry aft, on the weather clearing, her crew, to
their great astonishment, beheld, about a quarter of a mile inside of
them, high amongst the trees, in a swamp of mangroves, whither she had
forced herself a passage, a large barque, with troops on board.[B] In
consequence of this discovery, Ensign Du Vernett was, as soon as
possible, lowered with ropes from the Runnymede's stern, with twelve
soldiers, to communicate with the barque. At 7 A. M., the tide rising,
orders were given to the men to prepare to land at next low water,
and, if possible, get something cooked, as, during the hurricane, no
fires could be kept in the ship, and, consequently, the crew and
troops had not had anything but biscuit and a glass of spirits during
the storm. At half-past 3 o'clock P. M. the tide having fallen
sufficiently to enable the people to wade on shore, Ensign Du Vernett
returned on board and reported the vessel he had visited to be "The
Briton" from Sydney, bound to Calcutta, and which had sailed from the
former place, in company with the ships Royal Saxon, Loyds, and
Enmore, on the 12th of August, 1844, having on board Her Majesty's
80th regiment, 1000 strong, under the command of Lieut.-col. Baker.
The companies two, three, and six were on board the Briton, under the
orders of Major, afterwards Lieut.-col. Bunbury, and consisted of 311
soldiers, including 12 serjeants and 4 drummers, 34 women, 51
children, and the following officers, namely, Captains Best, Sayers,
and Montgomery; Lieutenants Leslie and Freeman; Ensigns Hunter and
Coleman; and Assistant-surgeon Gammie, medical officer in charge. The
Briton was commanded by Captain Alexander Hall. She had a crew of 34,
was a vessel of 776 tons, A 1, and was ascertained to be the same
barque which had drifted a-head of the Runnymede in the storm, having
parted with all her companions, which afterwards arrived safely at
their destination. The Briton was so short of provisions, that twelve
men were obliged to be satisfied with the ordinary allowance of four.

    [B] The roots of these trees support their stems some
    feet above the ground, and diverge in every direction,
    so as to produce an almost impenetrable thicket. The
    trees do not rise more than twelve feet high. They grow
    in marshy places, generally within the influx of the
    Indian Ocean, and where the tide can readily wash their
    stems.

By dusk, all hands, including soldiers, women, and children, had left
the wreck of the Runnymede, and were accommodated on board the Briton.
They were received by Captain Hall, Colonel Bunbury, and the officers
of the 80th, with the greatest kindness, although they were enduring
very great privations themselves. The crew of the Briton were
delighted to hear of there being a fair stock of stores on board the
Runnymede, particularly as regarded biscuit and flour, which, if
moderate weather continued, would be landed for the benefit of both
ships' companies.

In the morning after the wreck, a seaman of the Runnymede lost his
life by the following piece of disobedience and fool-hardy temerity.
Captain Doutty was sitting in Captain Stapleton's cabin, consulting
with the military officers as to the best mode of getting the women
and children on shore, when it was perceived that one of the seamen
had placed himself by the cabin windows, apparently dressed for a
swim. Captain Doutty enquired what brought him there: he instantly
replied, "We are all alike now." Captain Doutty told him he was
mistaken if he thought so, for that whilst two planks of the ship held
together, he was determined to keep the command, and ordered him to
leave the cabin. As he appeared unwilling to go, the chief officer was
desired to send him forward. Being called accordingly, he refused,
with an oath, to go, and immediately threw himself from the cabin
window, and swam towards the shore, which he never reached, as the
receding waves kept him out until he was exhausted, and the ship's
company saw him sink without being able to assist him. This man's fate
had the effect of keeping the others quiet until the water had fallen
sufficiently to enable them to wade through it to the shore. After the
landing Colonel Bunbury took the chief command of all parties.

We shall now find it most convenient to ourselves, as well as
entertaining to our readers, to continue our narrative in the shape of
a journal, only noticing those days on which any circumstances worth
recording occurred.

_Wednesday, 13th._--At daybreak, nearly low water, all hands returned
on board and commenced getting up provisions for landing. All more or
less damaged.

The Briton had lost all her boats, and the Runnymede's long boat was
the only one they had, and that was badly stove, so that the water
had run through her, and thereby prevented her being washed off the
deck by the waves: and she eventually became the means, by God's
blessing, of obtaining that assistance which saved the sufferers from
perishing on a desert island.

The carpenters, therefore, of both ships were ordered to report how
long a time it would take to put this boat into a state fit to proceed
to sea to seek assistance. They reported eight days. After a personal
communication, Captains Doutty and Hall received from Captain Sayers,
of the 80th regt. the following order, putting their ships' crews
under martial law, which was twice read to each crew.

                                    _Troop Ship "_Briton_,"_
                                        _12th Nov. 1844._

    Dear Sir,

    In consequence of the wreck of the troop ships "Briton"
    and "Runnymede," Major Bunbury calls on Captains Hall
    and Doutty to explain to the crews of their respective
    ships that they are from this moment under military law,
    and feeling it to be most essential for the well-being
    of the service that the strictest order and discipline
    be preserved by every one under his command, declares it
    to be his determination to punish, with the utmost
    severity, any act of insubordination and drunkenness.

                        By Order,
                            H. T. Sayers,
                                _Capt. 80th Regt._
    _To Capt. Doutty._

This day were landed from the Runnymede at low water, 37 bags and 6
half-bags of biscuit, 3 and a half bags of flour, and 9 baskets of
plums. In consequence of information that the crew of the Runnymede
meant to help themselves to the beer which formed part of the cargo,
and had laid a plan to plunder the ship, they were in the evening all
ordered on board the Briton. The only persons who remained on board
the Runnymede were Captain Doutty and his officers, and a few steady
soldiers of the 50th, and watches were regularly kept throughout the
night.

There appears to be a very prevalent opinion amongst common sailors
and private soldiers, that when a vessel is wrecked, all controul over
private property is from that moment lost too, and that it is not
stealing to lay hands on all they can take. Numerous instances of this
kind took place on the present occasion. And this crime, as well as
that of drunkenness, were scarcely checked by severe corporeal
punishment. Some of the men attempted thefts at the risk of their
lives; and, in one instance, a cask of bottled beer having been landed
too late to be got into store, was placed, by a serjeant's tent, in
care of a sentry, whose musket was known to be loaded with ball.
During the night two fellows attempted to get at it, and being
discovered were fired at, which so alarmed them, that one of them, in
his hurry to escape, fell into a mangrove swamp, which caused him so
much pain that he was easily captured. He proved to be a man of bad
character.

_Thursday, 14th._--Weather moderate, wind east, barometer 29° 55". The
crew employed this day landing stores, cleansing the decks from the
accumulated filth and rubbish. The carpenters employed on the long
boat. The stores landed were 3 baskets of sugar, 2 barrels of flour,
7 tierces and 1 barrel of salt provisions, 1 cask of vinegar, 1
puncheon of arrack, 2 cases of bottled fruits, 2 boxes of pickles, 6
barrels of pale ale, and 1 cask of sherry. The soldiers were employed
on shore clearing the ground of trees, many having been thrown down by
the hurricane, some of them very large, and apparently of the growth
of a century. They were also employed in erecting tents and making
roads and bridges. The tents were made of the sails of both ships, and
the flags or camp-colours used to distinguish the companies, were
Marryat's signals, also from the ships.

_Friday, 15th._--Wind east and moderate. Weather fine. Continued
landing provisions consisting of soap, preserved potatoes, biscuit,
flour, sugar, dholl or split peas, rice, pale ale, port wine, and
sherry. Finished the long boat's bottom, turned her up, and commenced
raising her two streaks. Employed drying damaged provisions. Water
discovered in the island; and a number of crabs, prawns, and other
shell fish picked up at low water. Several indications of other wrecks
were seen, but exploring parties had not yet straggled far from the
encampment.

_Saturday, 16th._--More provisions were landed this day. In the
evening, large fires were seen on the island to the north, and as
several muskets were discharged on shore away from the camp, and the
people fancied they saw natives, they were hailed and a volley of
musketry discharged, so no more of them were seen. But double watches
were set at night with loaded arms.

  [Illustration: Hullmandel & Walton Lithographers.
    No. 2.
      THE ENCAMPMENT.]

_Sunday, 17th._--This day no business was done, except by the
carpenters, whose work was of the utmost importance to the saving
the lives of upwards of 630 persons, with a scanty stock of
provisions. Divine service was performed on board the Briton by
Captain Sayers of the 80th in presence of the seamen and the troops,
who were regularly paraded for church, and the forms of prayer and
thanksgiving to the Almighty for the preservation of the people's
lives were read. Seven natives made their appearance on the shore to
the southward. Some of them tried to surround two sailors who were
gathering shell fish, but the sailors were too nimble for them. An
officer with a small armed party went in pursuit, but as soon as the
savages saw them they put off from the shore in a canoe, leaving their
fire, and close to it a piece of drift wood and some fish bones. And
at night again some of the natives attempted to approach the
Runnymede, but on being fired at they took themselves off. The
natives appeared to be quite naked and black, and of a robust frame,
with perfectly straight hair. This day also a spring of fresh water
was discovered. The commander sent out detachment orders regulating
the issue of rations and spirits to the troops, and complimenting
Captains Doutty and Hall and their crews, and also the military
officers and soldiers, on their conduct during the hurricane, and also
regretting that the natives should have been fired at, as much benefit
might arise from a conciliatory course, and much mischief from an
opposite one; and ordering that for the purpose of preventing any
rencontre in future between them and the military who might be
straggling too far from camp, a roll call should take place every two
hours, as well in the camp as on board the Briton.

_Monday, 18th._--Fine weather. Fatigue parties employed on shore
clearing the ground and erecting tents. The carpenters at work on the
long-boat; her bottom and topsides finished, and a portion of her
beams and ceiling placed. The crew engaged repairing her sails and in
cutting air-holes between decks in the Runnymede for ventilation. On
shore a court-martial sat for the purpose of trying men for stealing
and drunkenness. By an order issued this day Ensign Hunter of the 80th
was appointed to act as Adjutant. The Runnymede was made into a
hospital ship under the care of Dr. Gammie, whilst Mr. Bell gave his
medical attendance on shore to those whom it was not deemed necessary
to send to the hospital; and the Briton was to be considered as a
store-ship whence the provisions were to be issued daily, under the
superintendence of Ensign Venables. The remainder of the troops were
also ordered to disembark and encamp, the position of the Briton in a
stagnant swamp of half salt, half fresh water, with mangrove trees
crushed under it, being considered prejudicial to the health of the
men.

_Tuesday, 19th._--The carpenters employed laying the deck of the
long-boat. Crew landing beer casks, but many of them burst whilst
being carried ashore from being so long under water, and the straw
they were packed in consequently heating. The sick were transferred
from the Briton to the Runnymede. This afternoon the soldiers were
paraded for the first time since the wreck. Their appearance, owing to
their distressed situation, was somewhat similar to that of Falstaff's
ragged regiment.

_Wednesday, 20th._--Five soldiers were corporeally punished, by
sentence of court-martial, for stealing and insubordination. The
troops left the Briton according to order. Most of the officers
commenced erecting tents for themselves.

_Thursday, 21st._--The carpenters completed the deck of the long-boat.
Four of the soldiers straggled a short distance to the south of the
encampment in search of shell fish. They were attacked by a party of
natives, who speared the whole of them, two of them dangerously, one
of whom had three spears sticking in him. They were carried on board
the Runnymede. A strong party was sent in pursuit of the evil doers
but could not meet with them. Shortly after the return of the party,
Captain Doutty saw fourteen of the natives issue from the jungle armed
with their fishing-spears and apparently quite unconcerned, but the
tide being up and having no boat, our people could not get at them. It
was, however, deemed necessary to place advanced picquets round the
camp, and a four-pounder was placed on the top-gallant forecastle and
another on the poop of the Runnymede, in order to keep the natives off
if they should prove aggressive. There appeared to be no chance of
receiving any assistance from them. The island appeared to be wholly
unproductive, neither fruit nor vegetables having been discovered, but
several wild hogs were seen.

_Friday, 22d._--The carpenters employed putting a false keel to long
boat and caulking her. Landed 46 casks of beer, also some preserved
salmon and cheese. A board of survey assembled on board the Briton to
examine the stores saved, and to report as to the rations to be
issued, calculated for forty days. The court recommended the following
scale for alternate days, namely,

First day, 1/2 lb. bread, 1/2 lb. beef, 1/2 gill of spirits, 1/12 oz.
of tea, 1/2 oz. of sugar.

Second day, 1/3 lb. flour, 1/3 lb. pork, 1/4 pint peas, 1/4 oz.
coffee, 1/2 oz. sugar, 1/2 gill spirits, and this even would only last
36 days, that is, till 27th December. By this time, too, the coast for
two miles round the island was cleared of shell fish. This day a
private of the 80th regiment died in hospital of dysentery, most
likely caused by the water, which had a disagreeable vegetable taste.

_Saturday, 23d._--More beer landed from the Runnymede, also a case of
claret. These were now issued in lieu of spirits. This day the natives
came close to the camp. A few soldiers were sent to parley with them,
and took two red shell jackets, which were left on a bush as presents
for them. They only trampled on them, and at a given signal sent a
volley of spears at the soldiers in return, two only taking effect.
Two armed soldiers who had been concealed, then appearing, the natives
set up a yell and ran to the bush, leaving part of a bow and a bundle
of arrows behind them. They appeared very treacherous. They seemed
also to understand the effect of fire-arms, running away the moment
they saw any.

_Sunday, 24th._--Divine service was performed on board the Briton. The
coast was strewed in every direction with pieces of wreck. In the
evening part of a chest of drawers and the top of a washhand-stand
were found. These probably had floated from some vessel that had
foundered.

  [Illustration: Hullmandel & Walton Lithographers.
    No. 3.
      DEPARTURE OF THE "HOPE" IN SEARCH OF ASSISTANCE.]

_Monday, 25th._--Moderate breeze. The long boat, being finished, was
launched from the deck of the Runnymede at 11 o'clock, amidst the
hearty cheers of all hands. She was named "The Hope." Her mast was
then stepped and fitted, and an ample supply of provisions, water, and
other necessaries put on board her. At half-past five, P. M., she set
sail in charge of Captain Hall, of the Briton, with Mr. Skelton, chief
officer of the Runnymede, and the boatswain and five seamen.
Lieutenant Leslie, of the 80th, went in her as bearer of despatches.
The course proposed, at the suggestion of Captain Doutty, was, to get
into the track of ships proceeding to and from the Straits of Malacca;
and then, being guided by the winds and other circumstances, either to
cross to Moulmein, or go on to Calcutta.

_Tuesday, 26th._--Weather moderate. The Hope not in sight at daybreak.
The carpenters landed to make preparations for building another boat.
Parties out getting shell-fish. Some trepang, beech-le-mer, or sea
slug, was brought to Captain Doutty, which he attempted to cure by
cleansing, parboiling, and drying in the sun. This is reckoned a great
luxury by the Chinese, and is sold in their markets. It abounds in
the vicinity of coral reefs.

Captains Stapleton, Montgomery, and Best, in the evening, saw a wild
hog, between which and the bush they got unperceived. They each had a
shot at him, as he ran past them, and being wounded in the head, he
ran staggering amongst the fallen timber. A little spaniel dog, called
Billy, of the King Charles's breed, which happened to be with the
party, seized the hog by the ear. At the same time a soldier ran up to
despatch the animal with a large stick, and not observing the dog in
the dusk, he accidentally struck him an unlucky blow on the head, and
killed him. Poor Billy's fate was universally regretted in the camp,
where he was a general favourite. The hog weighed 80 lbs., had large
tusks, and his hide was half-an-inch thick. The meat was hard and
tough, but still was acceptable as a change. Some natives who were
near the spot where the hog was killed, on hearing the shots, left
their fire with a yell, and fled into the bush.

_Thursday, 28th._--Working parties clearing and deepening the wells,
which were beginning to fail. Several of the officers left the Briton,
their tents being completed. There were many beautiful shells of
various kinds found upon the beach. It was amusing to see such as are
generally made use of as mantel-piece ornaments, teeming with life,
and running about in every direction. A few fish were caught in nets
outside the Runnymede, quantities of small ones being driven into
shoal water by the large ones, which prey upon them.

_Friday, 29th._--The soldiers were employed burning a road to the
wells, the fallen trees being so interwoven that it was not possible
to cut one. The carpenters were cutting a keel for the boat. The crew
fishing and making nets. This evening there was a cry that a ship's
light was seen in the offing, which produced a considerable sensation
for the moment; but it turned out to be only Sirius rising.

_Saturday, 30th._--General parade for muster. The keel for the
intended boat brought in from the bush where it had been cut. A
carpenter, four sawyers, and a blacksmith from the 80th were ordered
to assist in building the new boat.

_Sunday, 1st December._--Divine service was performed. The guard on
board the Runnymede was now formed by convalescent soldiers, being one
serjeant and six privates of the 80th. The natives made very large
fires both to the northward and southward.

_Monday, 2d._--Bellows were finished for the forge, with the
pioneers' aprons for sides, and part of a gun-barrel for the pipe. The
tiller of the Briton's rudder was used for an anvil, and nails were
made out of the copper bolts from her stern posts. A sailor's canoe,
which was nearly finished, took fire, and both her gunwales were burnt
down.

_Tuesday, 3d._--Regular morning parades on the beach at 7 A. M.
commenced this day, the guards mounting immediately afterwards. The
bugle was sounded regularly, as in garrison, at daybreak, for parade,
for meals, and for bed at 8 P. M. The road still in progress of
burning. This, together with the tent-fires and those of the picquets,
had a very brilliant effect. Two officers went in search of water, and
found a running stream under the hills, about a mile from the camp,
which was very difficult to reach, from the denseness of the jungle.

_Wednesday, 4th._--A couple of punts have been made out of rattans,
covered with tarred canvas, and the canoe had plank sides put to it,
in lieu of the gunwales, which were burnt. There were some thunder and
lightning in the evening, and heavy rain, which caused the tents to
leak, they having been made of old canvas.

_Thursday, 5th._--A bag of damaged pepper sent on shore from the
Runnymede for the soldiers to eat with the shell fish. An oyster bed
discovered. A tree on fire, mistaken for a steamer's light.

_Friday, 6th._--The carpenters commenced planking the boat. Several
men were sent to the hospital with fever and head complaints. An order
was issued, prohibiting the soldiers bathing or otherwise exposing
themselves in the heat of the sun.

_Saturday, 7th._--The canoe was launched, and answered better than was
expected. Nearly the whole of the fallen trees on the island lay
towards the south-west, so that the hurricane must have come from the
E.N.E. or N.E.

_Sunday, 8th._--Divine service as usual. The canoe brought in a cargo
of fine oysters from the northward. The tracks of a number of hogs
were seen. A soldier of the 80th died in hospital of brain fever.

_Monday, 9th._--The Runnymede got a spar over her quarter, lashed to
the mizen-mast, to shore her up, the heavy surf causing her to bump
more than was agreeable. There was quite a fleet of canvas in the bay
fishing and paddling about.

_Tuesday, 10th._--One of the fishing crews caught a large fish of the
snapper kind, of about 20 lbs. weight. It was found to be coarse and
hard when cooked.

_Wednesday, 11th._--The encampment looked quite gay, each tent having
its distinguishing flag, or number of the company, hoisted; those of
the officers had also their signals flying. Captain Stapleton's had
the number of his regiment, 50th. The bay from the Runnymede had a
very pretty effect.

_Thursday, 12th._--Two turtles were seen upon the water. There were
only sufficient provisions on hand to serve this month through. The
Hope has been gone now sixteen days.

_Saturday, 14th._--A party of officers of the 80th went to the
northward on discovery, attended by the canoe. They crossed over to
the other island. Saw a wild beast in the bush of the panther kind.
Found some bundles of pigs' heads, tied with cane, laid together in
heaps, and stones suspended from the trees by rattan. They supposed
this to be some religious ceremony of the natives. They found a
quantity of excellent oysters on the rocks. They made a fire, and
dined off them.

_Sunday, 15th._--Divine service as usual. This was the 20th day after
the departure of the Hope. The present amount of ration to be reduced
one-half from to-morrow, which will be little better than starvation.
Very little shell fish to be now found within miles of the camp. About
eleven o'clock, A. M., there were two smart shocks of an earthquake.
The Briton shook so violently that all hands ran up from below,
fearing that she would fall over. The last shock had scarcely
subsided, when the shout of a sail, a sail! issued from a look-out
tree, on the right of the camp, upon which the people themselves had
established a watch, relieved every hour. The welcome cry quickly
resounded throughout the camp. The Runnymede immediately hoisted her
ensign and fired a gun, which was a pre-concerted signal. The camp
was in great commotion, every one enquiring where the sail was, and
straining their eyes to catch a glimpse of the stranger. Within a
quarter of an hour afterwards, she had rounded the point and was
visible to all. At one o'clock, P. M., she came to anchor abreast of
the Runnymede, in 15 fathoms, the men cheering on shore, whilst the
ship saluted her with twelve guns. She proved to be the Honourable
Company's schooner, George Swinton, of 70 or 80 tons, from Mergui,
with supplies of provisions for the sufferers, and the Hope towing at
her stern. Our canoes went off, and brought on shore Mr. Michael, an
ensign of the 17th Madras Native Infantry, the bearer of despatches
from Mergui to the commanding officer, to whom he communicated the
news of the safe arrival of the Hope at that port, and of the welfare
of her crew. They had reached Mergui in 11 days from the time of
leaving the island. They had suffered much from the heat of the sun
and fatigue, because, having either foul or light winds, they were
obliged to row the greater part of the distance, and to give up all
idea of going to Calcutta. Having made their report, they were
supplied with a lighter boat belonging to the American missionaries,
in which they proceeded to Moulmein. The next day the commanding
officer at Mergui despatched the George Swinton, under the command of
Captain Daniels, to the relief of the sufferers, bringing, amongst
other things, six young buffaloes. The arrival of this vessel at the
exact moment of need caused great rejoicings, and an extra half-pound
of biscuit and glass of spirits were issued to each man to commemorate
the event. In the afternoon a soldier of the 80th was unfortunately
drowned in the surf whilst bathing. On the arrival of the Swinton the
rations were increased, and comparative plenty was restored.

_Wednesday, 18th._--The Runnymede's mainmast was cut away, and she was
shored up with it to make her ride easily, being much shaken by the
surf. The Hope was brought on shore, and her deck and false keel taken
off, that she might be used for landing provisions and stores. A brig
appeared in sight to the southward. The Runnymede made signals, but
she passed on without taking any notice. She was supposed to be a
country ship.

_Friday, 20th._--The island is putting on a spring-like appearance.
Verdant spots are here and there to be seen, and the trees are
beginning to come into leaf. Even those which were thrown down by the
hurricane are struggling for life with the few roots left in the
ground, and some of sixty feet high, without branch or top, have shot
out small green twigs, forming a curious contrast with their scathed
trunks. Melons, limes, and other seeds, sown by the officers, now
coming up. Two native canoes took up a position near the north island,
and afterwards their people passed along the reef fishing. Captain
Doutty counted twenty-four persons on the reef, besides those left in
care of the canoes. A soldier of the 50th died in hospital this day of
brain fever.

_Sunday, 22nd._--Divine service as usual. The poop-awning of the
Briton was blown away, and the cuddy filled with water. The weather
very rough.

_Tuesday, 24th._--The Swinton's jolly-boat was swamped in the surf
whilst taking off water-casks. The long-boat went to their assistance,
and towed them alongside the schooner. The east end of the north
island was covered with natives in search of food; the poor creatures
seemed to depend entirely on shell-fish and sea-slug, picked off the
reefs, for their subsistence, with occasionally a fish caught with
their spears. During bad weather they must suffer much from hunger.

_Wednesday, 25th. Christmas Day._--The Swinton left for Moulmein. Mr.
Michael returned in her with despatches. The Runnymede's dingy
returning from the schooner was capsized in consequence of Thompson, a
seaman, falling on one side of her, when Edmund Hutter, a seaman, was
drowned, means of resuscitation proving of no avail. Divine service
was performed on board the Briton. The tents of the 80th looked very
gay, being decorated with green boughs in honour of the day. There was
no roast beef, but very good plum-puddings were made without sugar.

_Thursday, 26th._--Flies and musquitoes came in myriads; they were
very troublesome; there were none till now; the hurricane must have
swept them away. Very beautiful periodical flowers appeared. Also
snakes; several have been killed in camp. A young pig was shot by a
serjeant; the mother and the rest of the family escaped.

_Friday, 27th._--A wicker-work pot was made to catch fish in deep
water. A tablet was engraven on the rock, near the burial-ground, with
the names of the soldiers who had died on the island. At night large
fires were made round the camp to burn out and keep off the
musquitoes.

_Saturday, 28th._--At 7 A. M. a sloop-of-war brig, the Pilot, Captain
Jervis, with two schooner gun-boats in convoy, appeared. The latter
ran into the anchorage, and the former went round the islands in
search of other vessels. Sent our boat on board one of the former and
landed the officer, Mr. White, of the Company's Marine, who stated
that transports were at hand to relieve the sufferers; also that the
rest of the 80th regiment had arrived safely at Calcutta. The new
six-oared boat named "The Andaman" was launched at noon; she went
through the surf beautifully. The Pilot sent her cutter round with
Lieut. Leslie, and also some fresh meat and vegetables.

_Sunday, 29th._--At noon the Ayrshire, of 250 tons, arrived from
Moulmein, being one of three ships taken up by the Government there to
convey the sufferers away from the island; the other two were called
the Agnes Lee and the Elizabeth Ainslie. Capt. Jervis and three of his
officers dined on the island.

_Monday, 30th._--The first division of the 80th regiment commenced
embarking on board the Ayrshire. At 3 P. M. the Elizabeth Ainslie
arrived for the remaining portion of the 80th, and anchored near the
Runnymede.

  [Illustration: Hullmandel & Walton Lithographers.
    No. 4.
      THE DELIVERANCE.]

_Tuesday, 31st._--The Pilot came round from the northward, and
brought up in front of the camp. Commenced embarking the heavy stores
on board the Elizabeth Ainslie. At 4 P. M. the Ayrshire sailed with
the first division of the 80th regiment.


1845.

_Wednesday, 1st January._--The second division of the 80th regiment
embarked in the Elizabeth Ainslie, as also Captain Doutty and the crew
of the Runnymede. The officers dined on board the Pilot. There were
numerous native fires on both islands.

_Thursday, 2nd._--The Elizabeth Ainslie sailed. The natives collected
in great numbers on both islands. The gun-boat's gig, manned by
Lascars, whilst pulling along the reef, was pursued by five canoes.
The brig-of-war's cutter went to her assistance, when the canoes
pulled back to the reef and made off. The 50th detachment strengthened
their camp-guard and posted extra sentinels.

_Friday, 3rd._--The transport Agnes Lee arrived from Moulmein. The
invalid soldiers, women, and children, and heavy baggage were embarked
in the course of the day. At night the natives came round the camp in
great numbers; there were fires in every direction. A picquet was sent
out to drive them back; the picquet fired at a party moving in rear of
the tents, who fled, and extinguished their fires in a most
extraordinary manner, the whole, except a few scattered embers,
disappearing almost as if by magic. The brig of war despatched two
boats to pull along shore in front of the camp, and afterwards fired
two shots and a shell amongst a large body of natives gathered round a
fire a short distance to the left of the Briton. They took themselves
off and did not appear again that night.

_Saturday, 4th._--The remainder of the detachment of the 50th
embarked in the Agnes Lee. At night the natives again assembling in
and around the camp, the marines of the Pilot were landed to protect
the wrecks. Several shots were fired during the night.

_Sunday, 5th._--The last detachment of the wrecked troops, after a
sojourn of 55 days, sailed this day for Calcutta in the Agnes Lee, and
bid adieu to this inhospitable island, in words very different from
those of the poet, who sang

    "Isle of beauty, fare thee well."

The voyage was most prosperous, the several ships having arrived at
their destination within a few days of each other. The only place of
note they passed on the voyage being Barren Island; they had a full
view of its volcano, which is a cone thrown up from a valley. It was
then in partial action, and was ejecting volumes of smoke as they
passed it.

_Monday, 13th._--Latitude, by observation, 20° 59" north. A comet has
been seen for the last ten or twelve nights, in the south-west, about
equal to a star of the second magnitude, with a tail of about 8 or 10
degrees.

The detachments of the 10th and 50th regiments, on arriving at
Calcutta, proceeded on to Chinsmah by steam, and the detachment of the
80th landed at Calcutta, and took up their quarters in Fort William.




CONCLUSION.


Thus terminated one of the most remarkable shipwrecks upon record,
remarkable in all its circumstances, when we consider the coincidence
of two ships, each carrying troops, each sailing from a different
quarter of the globe, both bound to the same port, and both thrown
upon the same island, in one night, within half a mile of each other,
and the Runnymede possessing stores and necessaries which the Briton
stood in need of, and without which her company would, in all
probability, have perished: and each having the means of defence
against a race of savages, reputed to be cannibals, and so proverbial
for their ferocity, that they are greatly dreaded by the seamen of the
country ships, by whom they are called Wild Men of the Woods, and who,
but for the fire-arms they had, would have destroyed the whole of the
party.

But a still more remarkable fact is the extreme healthiness, under
numerous hardships and privations, of a company of upwards of six
hundred and thirty individuals, many of them women and children, in a
climate so unhealthy, that, in time past, it was obliged to be
abandoned by those who sought to settle in it. But here, in a sojourn
of 55 days, besides those who died by accidents, only three men, one
woman, and two or three children perished. And this to the great
surprise of those who came to their rescue, and so fully expected to
find disease prevalent, that they took with them a surgeon, a stock of
medicines, and a quantity of comforts for the use of the sick and
convalescent. These favourable circumstances may be attributed, with
propriety, to the almost miraculous interposition of the Almighty, who
vouchsafed to bless in an especial manner the prudence, good
seamanship, and cool intrepidity of the captains and officers of the
ships, and those under their care, whilst at sea: and afterwards, when
on shore, the judgment, skill, and good management of Lieut.-colonel
Bunbury and the military and other officers, as well as the steady
discipline of all who were under their command. These all in their
several stations have done great honour to their country, as well as
much credit to the respective services in which they were employed.

We must also remark upon the very sound state of the hull of the
Runnymede, which had not the slightest leak in her during the whole of
a most appalling tempest. The only water she made was that which came
in from the dashing of the waves.

We may also learn one important lesson from the perseverance of the
crew of the Runnymede. That is, never to abandon any good undertaking
on account of difficulties. Some unlooked-for circumstance may arise
to crown our endeavours with success. The crew of the Runnymede had
lost every thing but hope, when deliverance came to them unexpectedly.

We would conclude with one question to the benevolent and religious;
to those who desire to promote the civilization of the heathen. Can
nothing be done to christianize the ferocious tribes of the Andamans?
Let it be remembered what the New Zealand cannibals and the wild
bushmen of South Africa were before missionaries went amongst them,
compared with what they now are; and then let endeavours be made use
of, in reliance upon heaven's blessing, to bring these poor creatures
out of the lowest state of darkness and degradation into one of
Christianity and happiness.

THE END.


PELHAM RICHARDSON, PRINTER, 23, CORNHILL.




Transcriber's Note

This book contains archaic and variable spelling, which is preserved
as printed. Minor punctuation errors have been repaired, and
hyphenation has been made consistent.

The frontispiece illustration (No. 3) has been moved to its appropriate
place in the text.

Page 30 has a reference to the ship Loyds. This may be a printer error
for Lloyds, but has been preserved as printed.

Page 36--repective amended to respective--"... to explain to the crews
of their respective ships ..."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Wreck on the Andamans, by Joseph Darvall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK ON THE ANDAMANS ***

***** This file should be named 28388-8.txt or 28388-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/8/28388/

Produced by Sam W. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
