Project Gutenberg's The Ghost Breaker, by Charles Goddard and Paul Dickey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Ghost Breaker
       A Novel Based Upon the Play

Author: Charles Goddard
        Paul Dickey

Release Date: June 14, 2008 [EBook #25781]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GHOST BREAKER ***




Produced by K Nordquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







[Illustration: "_Warren--don't call me Highness!... my name is Maria_"]




THE GHOST BREAKER


A NOVEL BASED UPON THE PLAY



By

CHARLES GODDARD

AND

PAUL DICKEY



HEARST'S INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY COMPANY
NEW YORK                          1915

Copyright, 1915, by

HEARST'S INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY CO., INC.

_All rights reserved, including that of translation into the foreign
languages, including the Scandinavian_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                    PAGE

   I. JARVIS OF KENTUCKY                                      1

  II. THE BLIND PURSUIT                                      18

 III. IN THE ROYAL SUITE                                     35

  IV. AN OATH OF ALLEGIANCE                                  47

   V. EXIT JARVIS, LAUGHING                                  59

  VI. OVER THE SEA AND FAR AWAY                              74

 VII. THE ROMANCE OF THE CASTLE                              87

VIII. THE NEW PROFESSION                                    105

  IX. CHECKMATE THE FIRST                                   125

   X. A WAGER WITH THE DUKE                                 140

  XI. WHEN THE SHIP COMES IN                                161

 XII. WELCOME TO SEGURO!                                    181

XIII. "GENTLEMEN, A MAN!"                                   198

 XIV. MORE OBSTACLES                                        217

  XV. MYSTERIOUS INFLUENCES                                 239

 XVI. AS IN DAYS OF OLD                                     250

XVII. CONCLUSION                                            267




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"Warren--don't call me Highness!... my name is
    Maria"                                        _Frontispiece_

                                                    FACING PAGE

It was Jarvis of Kentucky                                    38

--"and to faithfully fight in my lady's cause"               56

"Just a minute. How did that lock get broken?"               70

"I am known from Bowling Green to the Golden Gate, as
    Warren the Ghost Breaker"                               106

"Gentlemen--a man"                                          212

"So, you are the brave American, are you?"                  214

"Ah, se√±or, in all my experience I have never seen
    such an adventurous palm...."                           222

"Ah, Mr. Warren, looking for an honest man, like
    old Socrates?"                                          232

Rusty caught him by the arm                                 262

His next weapon was a chair                                 270

"Don't shoot!"                                              278




I

JARVIS OF KENTUCKY


Down the winding roadway came the thunder of hoofbeats!

As the two horsemen approached through the deepening twilight a sobbing
negro woman peered timidly through the doorway of the old Southern
manor house. There was a call from within.

"Put out this light, Mandy," were the words of the weak voice. "Hurry,
Mandy. Maybe it's the Marcums coming back."

"Yas, Cunnel; yassir." She obediently retreated, and the dim light
within was suddenly extinguished.

The two riders turned in from the thoroughfare, speeding past the
half-swung gate up the drive toward the broad portico. The foremost
slid from his saddle before his horse had come to a stop.

"Hold her, Rusty!" And then he leaped up the steps, to dash into the
dark entry.

"Who is it? Stop!"

There was no weakness of spirit in the tremulous tones from the room
within.

"Dad! dad! I've come!"

"Oh, my boy! You're just in time," and the speech ended in a sigh which
sent a thrill of horror through the newcomer. "Just ... in ... time!"

"Lawd be praised, Marse Warren," sobbed the negress, as she sank to her
knees before the table, where she fumbled with the lamp.

"Light the lamp ... why, it's Mandy!" and the young man ran a nervous
hand across his forehead as the wick caught the flame. "Dad! What's the
trouble? Where's mother? Why were the lights all out?"

In the corner of the room, on an antique "settle," was stretched the
form of old Colonel Jarvis of Meadow Green.

"It's the end, Warren. I stood off Yankee charges and artillery, but a
sneaking hound from the hills has put the finish on it all--and sent it
in a bullet through my back, without giving me the chance to fight
back, as the Yanks did."

Warren Jarvis dropped to his knees beside his father. His pleasant,
youthful face was drawn to mummy-like wanness. His eyes glowed with
curious intensity, as they devoured the beloved features of the old
man. The rays from the oil lamp cast a melancholy glow over the
furniture of a bygone society, in this characteristic parlor of an old
Southern mansion. But their effect upon the ghastly features of Colonel
Henderson Jarvis presaged only too well the tragedy which was to come.

The aged man raised a weak arm, to encircle the shoulders of his son.
His eyes closed in exhaustion, and for a full moment the lips moved
without the emanation of a word.

Warren Jarvis turned toward the panic-stricken Mandy.

"Quick! What is the trouble? Where is mother? Speak up, Mandy.... I've
come all the way from New York in answer to father's telegram. What's
the trouble?"

Mandy became more disconsolate, and, with the hysterical sorrow of a
Southern family servant, the more incapable of expression.

"Warren ... Warren, my boy!" were the words which at last came from the
white lips of his father. "I am going to leave you soon.... I kept up
until you arrived, for I must give the honor of the family into your
keeping, before it is all over.... Are you prepared to take it up where
I stand now?"

The young man nodded. He beckoned to the servant woman, with an
eloquent pantomimic command, to bring his sire a drink. The girl
silently obeyed, leaving the room for the moment.

"Father, I've come back from the East to do anything, everything. Tell
me--what happened, and where is mother? I am frantic!" His shoulders
shook as though from a chill. His face was close to his father's, as
the colonel's gray eyes opened upon him.

"Your mother passed away last night--it was too much for her poor weak,
aching heart, Warren," and his voice sank again to a whisper, as he
added, "Your first duty will be to lay us away together, and then to
avenge this double murder."

Warren Jarvis lost his worldly-wise self-control, acquired through the
adventurous years since he had journeyed forth from the quaint old
Kentucky home. A sob broke from his lips, and his face sank on the arm
of the old aristocrat,--he was instinctively boyish in his grief,
returning once more to the shelter of that paternal shoulder.

Mandy had returned with a glass of stimulant, which she held to the
colonel's lips. The draught refreshed him immensely. He gently patted
the shoulders of his son, and continued with firmer tones:

"There, Warren boy, pull yourself together. The doctor will be along in
his buggy soon. He dressed my wound, two days ago, and he sat with your
dear mother ever since she received the shock of the shooting. I sent
the Marlowe girls back to their house just an hour ago to rest, because
they were worn out.... Everyone has been good and tried to help, but it
is no use.... Leave us alone, Mandy."

The woman stepped unsteadily through the door, her hands covering her
twitching face. There she bumped into a fat, coal-black darky, he who
had accompanied the son on the long ride. She drew him into the shelter
of the corridor, leaving father and son together for the final
confidences.

"But, father, it was all so sudden? Are you comfortable now? Where is
your wound?"

Warren rose more upright on his knees. He now observed the swathings
about the elder's breast, beneath the crumpled soft shirt. He caressed
the shattered frame with affectionate simplicity.

"I must speak quickly, Warren, for although I suffer no more pain, Dr.
Grayson told me the truth--my strength is going every hour. Your mother
had been in poor health, and I had ridden down to the village to see
the doctor, for a tonic for her. On the way out again, I passed
Henley's poolroom, where the cheap gamblers are still running their
crooked betting on the Louisville and Lexington races. Jim Marcum
crossed from the front of the saloon, and I had to rein in quickly to
keep from running him down. He looked up at me, with his hand on his
hip. 'Trying the same old trick on me that you did with my brother Ed?'
he called. I had nothing to say to Jim Marcum--you know, Warren, that
old feud was over these thirty years, as far as I was concerned. I
looked him in the eye, and he dropped his gaze, like a wolf which
daren't stare back at you. Then I rode on. As I turned the corner, past
the little church, I heard a shot and tumbled forward in the saddle."

Warren's hands clenched until the nails cut his palms.

"The cowardly hound!" he muttered.

"Just as my father was shot by Marcum's father, right after the War--in
the back, Warren. The horse knew enough to stop, and I rolled down to
the ground. Dr. Grayson ran down the street, carried me into the church
vestibule, and dressed my back. They wanted to keep me in the parson's
house--but I told them to bring me on home, for I wanted to be near
your mother. It was a mistake ... a grave mistake. For when they
brought me back in the doctor's buggy and called her to the portico,
she fainted, and never regained consciousness. That's all, Warren. The
end came last night for her--to-night I will join her."

He opened his eyes with ghastly intensity of expression. Then, to the
surprise of the younger man, he half raised himself on his elbow.

"Warren!" and the tones were almost shrill, "you must _get_ Jim Marcum
if it's the last act of your life. He broke the feud law when he killed
a woman, as he did with the death of your mother. My dying command is
that you end this old fight between our families: he is the last of his
line, and you the last of yours. The feud began nearly eighty years
ago. It is a different world then in that old Kentucky. I have tried to
live upright, God-fearing, and had supposed that time would efface the
old hatred. At least I ignored it. But Jim Marcum never forgot that
your Uncle Warren had killed his father in that stand-up battle in the
old tobacco warehouse; it is the curse of the Blue Grass State, this
feud law. But you must carry out the vengeance, Warren. When you scotch
that snake, there will be no more."

"Didn't they try to get Marcum, dad?" asked Warren slowly, trying to
realize it all.

"No. He disappeared--helped by some of those touts and gamblers. They
say he has gone to the mountains. But you follow him, after ... after
I...." He sank back again, groaning. "God bless you, boy. When you end
this bitter debt, you will have done everything in the world I ever
wanted,--what a fine son you have been through all the years!"

Warren rose to his feet, and with hands clasped tensely behind him
walked to the window. He heard a sound of buggy wheels and the trotting
of a horse; it neared the house.

"It must be the doctor, dad. I'm glad he is here again." He turned
about to look at the clear-cut face. He was horror-stricken: the eyes
were closed, the hand had dropped limply, and already the fine firm
mouth had opened weakly, with a piteous weakness. He rushed forward,
dropping again by the side of the couch.

A step behind him did not interrupt the soft pleadings of the tearful
voice.

"Dad, dad! Won't you speak to me? You _must_ hold out. The doctor has
come. Dad, old daddie mine. Speak! Speak!"

The eyes opened, but there was no expression in them. The mouth closed
convulsively, and as he leaned close he heard the last message: "God
bless you, boy!... Take ... care ... of ... yourself."

Warren's face was buried on the bosom as it ceased to breathe. A kindly
touch on his shoulder brought him to a knowledge of the doctor's
presence.

"It's so good that you arrived in time, Warren," was the soft-voiced
comment. "Your father passed away happy, I know--he had held himself to
this life by a marvelous will-power until you came. Steady yourself
now."

The doctor knelt by the couch and, with the manly tenderness of an old
family friend, crossed the tired patrician hands above that valiant
heart.

Warren Jarvis answered not. He walked toward the window again. He
peered out into the great, black, miserable, lonely void stretching
away toward the southeast. In those distant hills, beyond his vision
but familiar as the landmarks of his boyhood, he knew the cowardly
assassin of his parents was exulting over the cruel success.

Not a tear came to his relief. His pleasant face hardened to the
rigidity of a stone image. The sinews of his athletic frame thrilled
with a new emotion--the feud hatred inherited through generations of
Kentucky fighters. He would have gladly given his own life for the
sublime pleasure of throttling with his bare hands the scoundrel who
had wiped out all that was fine and sweet in his life.

Behind him the doctor gave whispered orders to Mandy and two tearful
women neighbors who had quietly slipped into the house. Warren did not
notice them in his abstraction; they respected his suffering by leaving
the room without a greeting.

As he stood there the soft spring breeze fluttered the curtains of the
broad parlor windows, bearing in the fragrance of the vines on the
portico outside. It was all so silent and different from the brilliant
social life he had left behind in New York. Warren's whole life seemed
to flit past him, as he stood there now, with the impersonality of a
kaleidoscope.

He remembered the early years on this beautiful Blue Grass estate of
his father's ... the romantic boyhood of the South, enlivened by
horseback rides, hunting trips, boating, fishing--those elemental
country sports so sadly lacking in the life of the city youth, ... the
faithful, admiring negro servants to whom young "Marse Warren" had been
a veritable Sir Galahad--the flower of the neighborhood chivalry.
Indeed, in this portion of the States still glows the tradition of the
ancient knighthood: the gallantry to women, the reverence for family
honor, the bravery in men, the loyalty to neighborhood, commonwealth,
and nation,--in verity, the spirit of ideal citizenship.

Warren saw once more the gentle face of his mother, as she worked in
her old-fashioned garden of rosemary, hollyhocks, larkspur, iris, rue,
... heard the soft dialect of quaint old ladies gossiping on the broad,
shaded portico ... listened again to the laughter of neighboring
judges, colonels, majors--his father's old cronies--as they
good-naturedly wrangled and bantered over the battles of the War, the
merits of their respective thoroughbreds, or the correct manner in
which to concoct that nectarian classic of the Southland, the mint
julep!

To Warren's retrospection came the vision of his departure for the
famous college in the East, the joyful vacation times, and finally his
decision to seek adventure far, far to the south--in Brazil, Guatemala,
Panama, where he had developed his own executive caliber as a commander
of men, in the great construction work on the Big Ditch.... Then came
the sorrowful day when he had returned from his travels, to behold the
ravages of time on his mother's aging face and his father's stooping
shoulders. Even the servants were changed, and it had been to keep a
closer bond with the dear old estate that he had taken faithful Rusty
Snow as his manservant when he went on to New York again to pursue his
profession.

Warren's mind burrowed in the memories of the feudism of the
countryside, the sole blot on its simple yet aristocratic modes. He
remembered the fragmentary stories of the ancient Marcum-Jarvis quarrel
... this had cost the lives of men for three generations, in an equity
of vengeful settlement based strictly on the Mosaic law of "an eye for
an eye--a tooth for a tooth." The Marcum family fortunes had been
dissipated, those of the Jarvis clan ascending--yet still the feud
continued, until the men of both families had paid for the bitterness
with their lives. Now his father had been the last Jarvis to go--after
a lull of many years.

The sweetness of the old memories was swept by the maelstrom of hate
which surged through his heart. As a boy he hardly knew the meaning of
the word--the grim looks of the kinsmen, the tear-stained face of his
mother, had been little explanation--little had been said. But _now_
the iron of vengeance had entered his soul; and he turned about
suddenly, facing the body of the colonel.

Advancing toward the settle, he knelt by the body, even as a knight of
old, to take his vows. He raised his clenched right hand.

"Father! I swear by my love for you and my mother that I will wipe out
the Marcums, cost what it may. I will devote my life to settling the
score Jim Marcum has made. I swear it to you, father!"

It seemed to him as though a faint smile of approbation flitted across
the face despite the seal of the Great Calm. Even as he knelt there,
his quick brain began to lay the plans--and then ... then he remembered
what he must see upstairs! His brief moments in the old home had been
so absorbed by the dying words of his sire, by the engulfing flame of
hate which had burned away all the sweetness of the environment, that
he had selfishly forgotten everything but his own grief.

He staggered to his feet and walked slowly from the room.

Outside the door, on an old-fashioned chair in the long corridor
running from portico to kitchen, he found faithful Rusty, sobbing with
his face in his hands.

"Oh, Marse Warren! Oh, Marse Warren!"

"Rusty, call Mandy," was the simple answer.

Rusty hastened to obey. The woman was assisting the two neighbors in
some preparations on the floor above. She came down the stairs
tremulously, catching his outstretched hand and kissing it impetuously.

"Where is _she_, Mandy?" he asked, in a stifled voice.

Mandy spoke not, but ascended the stairway, as Warren followed with
bowed head. Each broad step seemed steeper than the one below. At last
he raised his eyes before the doorway of his parents' bedroom. Mandy
stepped aside.

Within, on a little mahogany sewing-table, burned a dozen candles in
his great-grandmother's Colonial candelabra. He turned unsteadily to
the right, and saw her!

"O mother, mother!..."

That was all.




II

THE BLIND PURSUIT


The sad days immediately following the double funeral were so filled
with visits from relatives and old friends, legal transactions
necessary for the transfer of the estate of the old colonel, a
successful tobacco factor in his time, and a hundred and one other
engrossments, that in the months afterward they were hazy as an
unpleasant dream.

With the newly acquired calm which surprised him, Warren Jarvis left no
stone unturned to ascertain, with quiet inquiries, the location of Jim
Marcum.

There was no clew. The man had mounted a horse on the day of the
shooting, to disappear down the dusty Kentucky road, leaving the
village far behind and ignoring the possible escape by railroad. His
simplicity was cunning, for the blue hills offered more avenues of
disappearance than the iron roadbed of the local transportation.

Equally cunning, however, was his determined pursuer. Warren Jarvis,
after burying his parents, and making the conventional round of
respectful ceremonies, started again for his neglected business in New
York. Here he planned to adjust his affairs, then to return to the
mountain country, by a roundabout route, to begin his man-hunt,
_incognito_ and unsuspected.

"I'll cover every mountain trail, every valley path until I find Jim
Marcum," he confided to Major Selby, his father's closest friend, as
they stood on the train platform waiting for the final minute of
departure. "When it happens I will let you know, Major. Until that
time, good-by, and God bless you."

The train had come, and unaccompanied by Rusty Snow this time, Jarvis
clambered up the steps to wave to the old Kentuckian. As the major
turned away, he stroked his snowy mustache with a shrewd twinkle in his
blue eyes, to soliloquize:

"I calculate the boy will make his father proud. The old feud blood
runs in the Jarvis veins, and even the North can't spoil him. I wonder
why Rusty didn't go along--that darky will be broken-hearted to be left
behind on the old place."

But Rusty knew very well why he had been left behind!

And with all his jolly laughter, plump complacency, and characteristic
African simplicity, Rusty Snow possessed an inherent faculty of subtle
concentration which had served the family of Jarvis since the days when
he had been a slave pickanninny.

A week or more he spent in the peaceful Southern hamlet of Meadow
Green, imbibing gin and ginger "pop" in the saloons frequented by those
walking bureaus of information, the negro barbers. He consorted with
darky jockeys and horse-trainers--this was the center of the great
thoroughbred breeding district--and everywhere he went, with glistening
smiles, laughing eyes, and infectious amiability, he bore one query in
his mind. Where was Jim Marcum?

The query seemed unanswerable.

Rusty confided his failure to Major Selby, who in turn sent a letter to
Warren Jarvis at his New York club. There the latter was hastening his
preparations for the great _trek_ through the mountains. Warren had
closed his office, where, profiting by his experiences in South and
Central America, he had maintained a successful exporting agency: all
his affairs were in hand, and that hand closed. All his outstanding
investments had been hypothecated, with shrewd advantage. At last he
was ready, certain that should he lose his life in the vengeful
venture, his kinsfolk would be taken care of, without legal
complications: with all his inherited romanticism, Jarvis of Kentucky
was a man of astuteness.

He was sitting in the grill of his club, brooding over a solitary
glass, unmindful of the friendly chatter of the members about him, when
a uniformed page brought him a yellow envelope. He tore open the
telegram, sensing important news. It was only from Meadow Green that he
received his club mail. And it was from Louisville that the message
came. It was simple, and yet it left him bewildered.

    "WARREN JARVIS,
    Export Club, N.Y.

    Coming with Marcum. Buy supplies.

                              RUSTY."

At first Warren smiled, then he swore, as only a chivalrous Southron
can! Why should Rusty be coming with Marcum? He could not have arrested
or imprisoned him. What were the supplies? Evidently this was some
attempt at code which was beyond his ability to guess.

He spent the night and the next day in a perplexed mood.

A wire sent to Major Selby, inquiring as to the whereabouts of the
negro, brought back the simple reply, "Missing--no one knows."

Toward evening, after much perturbation, Warren decided upon a measure
of preparedness for whatever might happen. He had given up his bachelor
quarters on Madison Avenue two mornings previous, in expectation of the
long trip through Kentucky. One night he had spent at his club. Yet, if
Marcum were coming to New York, it were best to be located in some
place where he could cover his own identity without attracting
attention. Such a place would naturally be a large hotel. Accordingly
he registered at the Hotel Belmont under an alias. This was close to
the Grand Central Station--handy for a quick departure from town, if
such were necessary.

Jarvis packed two suitcases with his modest needs for the Southern
trip, and donned his evening clothes for dinner at the club. Several
telephone calls convinced him that Rusty had not made an appearance as
yet.

When he reached the club, the big building was swarming with men of his
acquaintance, yet he seemed curiously apart from them. Since his
father's murder and the death of his mother, he had proceeded under
what engineers call "forced draught." His nerves, like iron, had been
drawn tight--to the snapping point: only some great climax of relief
would disentangle the tense feelings which he now controlled with
external calmness, and sub-surface tremors which warned him of an
approaching catastrophe.

For an hour he sat brooding in the quiet library of the club. He had
tried to eat; but all the artistry of the famous French _chef_ could
not conjure up an appetite. Men passed by him, glancing curiously at
the usually jovial companion; the twisted, drawn expression surprised
them. He tried to read a magazine; the printed lines "pied" themselves
before his twitching eyes, blurring into a vision of that last bitter
scene in the room with his dying father. And even the vision had faded
now, to dissolve into one dull mass of color--a wavering, throbbing
field of _red_!

"Mr. Warren Jarvis! Mr. Warren Jarvis!"

The page stood by the library door, calling. He sprang to his feet,
brought back to a consciousness of the present with galvanic
suddenness. He turned, bewildered for an instant, and then walked
slowly toward the boy.

"What is it?" he asked.

"A man wants to see you, sir, down at the front door. A colored
man...."

Jarvis waited for no more. He hurried down the oaken stairway, out
through the vestibule, and hatless, breathless--relieved to a great
extent from his tension--he caught the hand of faithful Rusty Snow.

"Lawd be praised!" murmured that jubilant henchman. "I done thought he
might beat me to it!"

"What do you mean, Rusty? Why didn't you come inside?"

"Dat cop at de door wouldn't let no darky come in. I want to talk to
you right away, Marse Warren. Right away quick."

Jarvis turned about, with a direction to await him.

He hurried to the coat-room, caught up his light overcoat and hat, and
rushed out through the door. Rusty helped him into the garment, with
fingers tremulous with joy at the renewal of this familiar and loving
task.

"Come, we'll go down the side street. I've given up my apartment, and
there's no place to talk but the sidewalk. What did your telegram mean,
Rusty?"

"Well, sah, jest what it said. I done followed dat man all de way from
Meadow Green to de Manhattan Hotel, dat's what it mean."

Jarvis stopped and, with eyes dilating, looked Rusty full in the face.

"Jim Marcum in New York? What can he be doing here?"

Rusty chuckled.

"Me--oh--my, boss, but dat's jest what I thought at fust. But now I
knows. I spent all my time an' all de money I could beg offen de major
tryin' to snoop aroun' dem gin-mills down home to l'arn. An' it wasn't
ontel yestiddy afternoon dat I seen dis yere Marcum come galloping down
on hossback, wid some poh white trash moonshiner ridin' wid 'im. Dey
goes right to de depoh an' jumps offen de hosses. I wuz in Eph Black's
saloon, but dar ain't nuffin missin' me. I walks over to de station
agent's winder an' I sees dis Marcum wid a roll o' bills dat would
choke a hoss. He buys a ticket, an' den he goes down de patform. I axes
Hen Barrows, de agent, where dat man goin'. He says Noo York. Den I is
satisfied. I jest walks down de track to de junction, by de water
tank."

"Hurry up, Rusty. What about Marcum?" was Warren's impatient
interjection.

"Wall, I sees dis yere man with 'im watchin' de platform--an' wen de
train pull in, inter it Marcum goes. She alluz slows up at de
sidin'--cause dere's a junction, an' so I jumps 'er, at de hind
platform. Well, Marse Warren, dat man he's on de train. It's only day
coaches ontel we gets to Lueyville, an' I walks from de Jim Crow car
through de train just onct. Dis Marcum he don't recollect me,--I'm just
a darky to him. But I sees 'im a-workin' in his seat wid som'pin dat
shows he recollects you, sah."

"What was that, Rusty?"

"He was a-oilin' a gun--an' you know who dat gun is for. He'll be
a-lookin' for you, Marse Warren."

"What did you do then? How did you manage to stay on the train?"

"Oh, I jest stuck dere, Marse Warren. Dis nigger has had enough
'sperience in dis world to know dat he spends all he has w'en he has
it. So de day you left I takes de money you gives me for a railroad
ticket, an' buys one an' puts it inside my pocket. So, I was ready for
dis Marcum. I follows 'im to Lueyville, whar I telegram to you, and
keeps right on 'is trail w'en he changes cars for Cincinnati. He keeps
on comin' to Noo York, an' I am in de day coach all dat time. Den I
follows right to de Manhattan Hotel. He ain't nebber been in Noo York
befoh, because he walks all de way to de hotel instid o' takin' a
taxicab. Dat man ain't no _quality_!"

Warren was lost in thought. He stopped at the next corner.

"Listen, Rusty. You did good work. I wanted to have you find him, and
instead he came right to me. Now, we must end this whole thing
to-night." For an instant the Kentuckian was nonplused, and
instinctively turned to the old family servant with that curious trust
which the native Southerner instinctively places in the "family" negro.
"What shall I do now, Rusty?"

Rusty's usually big eyes narrowed to slits in which the whites were
hardly visible.

"Marse Warren, jest wait for dat man. He's here, you knows it, for your
life. Ef you cain't git him, _I can_. I got mah razor an' dat's a
better weepon dan any ole gun. You jest wait--an' let me do de rest."

Warren turned and started back toward the club.

"I'll be waiting at the Export Club, Rusty. If he hunts up my address
on Madison Avenue, the hall boy will send him there. If he wants to see
me, he already has my address--and everyone in Meadow Green knows the
club as my address. Now, you go up to the rooms I have taken in the
Belmont Hotel. The room number is 417--you just wait there until you
hear from me. What did you mean by 'supplies' in that telegram, Rusty?"

The darky chuckled.

"Lawsee, Marse Warren, I knows dat you is a reg'lar Noo Yorker by dis
time and don't carry de supplies of a gentlemen. I mean a .38-caliber!
Has you got one?"

Warren smiled for the first time since their surprising meeting.

"No, I guess I have become a victim of New York. The worst weapon I
have on me, Rusty, is a fountain pen--and I'm afraid Jim Marcum
couldn't read the ammunition!"

Rusty looked slyly about him. They were in a dark spot on Fifth Avenue,
the shop fronts deserted and not a pedestrian within a block. The darky
slipped his hand into his pocket, and surreptitiously handed his master
a heavy, portentous automatic which would have sent joy into the heart
of a Texas Ranger. There was a vibration of honest pride in his voice
as he explained:

"Dere, Marse Warren. I went widout po'k chops an' chicken all de way to
Noo York jest to lay in supplies while I was waitin' betwixt trains at
Lueyville! I 'lowed you all 'd be too wrapped up in yoh troubles ter
bother about dis, an' I recomembered dis here Noo York Sullivan Law
w'ich makes it a crime fer a decent citerzen ter carry a gun, so dat
the burglars kin work in peace. Take it, Marse Warren, an' plant every
seed in de right place!"

The tears came into the eyes of the Kentuckian.

"Rusty, you're a jewel!"

"Yassir, in a ebony settin'! But, now, please git back to dat club
place, an' wait fer Jim Marcum. Dat man's mind was on his bizness when
I seen him in de smokin' cyar, an' he ain't thinkin' of nothin' else!"

They strolled down toward the club again. Warren gave a few parting
directions and handed Rusty a roll of bills for emergency.

"Remember, Rusty, when you hear from me by any message at all, you're
to come at once,--I'll just mention my first name. I'm registered at
the Belmont as John Kelly of New Orleans--I couldn't hide my Southern
accent. Tell them you're my valet, and show the key--I can trust you to
get up to the room. If I call for you, pay the bill from that change,
and don't let the grass grow under those number twelves!"

Rusty smirked happily.

"Hallelujah, Marse Warren, you'se jokin' agin--de fightin' blood of de
Jarvises is bilin'--I knows de signs. Why, Marse Warren, I recollects
yoh father when...."

But his master's face changed.

"Not now, Rusty. I'm thinking too much about my father. No more talk
for either of us. Just action."

He turned into the side street toward the Export Club. Rusty--fresh
from Kentucky psychology--doffed his cap and disappeared as Warren
entered the Grecian portal.

Inside the clubhouse he found a letter awaiting him. It was scrawled in
the bold, ungrammared style which might have been expected. He read it
standing tensely by the doorway, as dozens of men walked in and out,
little dreaming of the tragedy attached to that casual fragment of
white note-paper. It was written on the stationery of the Hotel
Manhattan--diagonally across the street from the hostelry where Warren
had inadvertently registered for his brief stay in the city.

He read the words again and again.

    "DEAR JARVIS; export Club, new York.

    am visiting in New York and would like to see you and call off our
    kwarrel youre fathers death was misunderstandin and were last of
    our families will be at Above hotel all evenin and tomorrow come
    Around when you get chance and shake hands i Will prove I aint
    meant no harm.

    Friend JIM MARCUM."

The Kentuckian crumpled the note in his hand, and then walked toward
the fireplace of the grill. It had been weeks since any logs had been
burned there, but the flakes of soot still clung to the stone casement.
Warren struck a match, and a curious smile illumined his face as he
ignited the paper, holding its flaming fabric between his fingers until
the last half-inch had burned. He dropped the tiny fragment after
lighting his cigar with its flame.

One of his friends, a Brazilian coffee merchant, addressed him in the
native tongue, which Warren spoke as fluently as English.

"Ah, _se√±or_, you care not for your letter?"

"Oh, it's just a little invitation to a party to-night," laughed Jarvis
of Kentucky. "If anyone found it on my person, he might think I kept
late hours and associated with bad company. Let us have a drink to our
friendship in the club, for I may take a long journey to-night, and
never see you again!"




III

IN THE ROYAL SUITE


A beautiful young woman stirred uneasily in the early slumber of the
evening. Eleven floors below her, in the foyer of the Hotel Manhattan,
the after-theater crowd of visitors thronged and buzzed happily. But
the girl, after an unusual day of anxiety in a strange land, was ill at
ease, with fitful dreams.

The Paris clock of her Highness delicately struck two musical notes
upon the chimes, to indicate the half-hour; at the same instant, as
though by echo and vehement confirmation, two revolver shots resounded
in the corridor.

The girl shuddered as she opened her large dark eyes, sitting bolt
upright in bed. She heard a slamming of doors, a growing hubbub in the
usually decorous hallway outside, and her feminine curiosity almost
conquered the aristocratic reserve, to impel her to rise and discover
the origin of the hubbub.

She was spared the trouble, for suddenly the door of her boudoir
received a vigorous thump. The lock crashed and it swung open,
admitting the rays of a red electric lamp in the corridor outside. The
portal swung shut with even greater promptitude, as a dark body leaped
over the threshold.

"_Madre de Dios!_" she screamed. Then, after a gasp, "Who's there!"

The intruder backed against the door, working with the top bolt, which
was still intact. She could see the vague outline by the dim glow of
the moonlight which streamed into her room.

Then, as she seemed preparing for another cry, he turned toward her.

"Ssssh! Don't make any noise," he whispered vibrantly, audaciously.

The girl slipped from her bed and drew a flimsy dressing-gown about
her.

"What do you want?"

"Silence!"

She had reached the lamp on the small boudoir table near the bed. She
switched on the electric light. They stared at each other
wide-eyed--but stirred by different feelings. Hers was the fright of a
woman finding herself in the power of a strange and desperate man; his
the battling alertness of a man fighting for his own life against odds.

It was Jarvis of Kentucky!

[Illustration: It was Jarvis of Kentucky]

Despite his immaculate evening clothes, the blanched face, drawn mouth,
and the revolver in his hand made him appear to her as the
personification of that vague terror of the unfamiliar dark which all
women and children know so well. He crouched there, reading the
character in her haughtily tossed head and imperious eyes. The details
of her beauty he ignored, remembering only three important facts: "She
is young, she is frightened but has not lost control of herself." He
reached forward and touched the switch of the lamp. Again the moon was
the sole illumination of the room!

A voice outside in the corridor came to them.

"What's the row?"

"Somebody's shooting up the hotel!" was the reply, from another throat.

"Not a sound ... do you understand?" whispered Jarvis, as he backed
toward the door again.

"What right...?" she began.

"Quiet!"

The voices in the corridor were closer now.

"Where'd he go? Look on the fire-escape."

"No use--he's on this floor, I tell you."

The girl advanced toward him, her own spirit asserting itself, as she
realized that help was within calling distance. Yet she did not call!

"What is it? What do you want? What have you done?"

Warren slipped the revolver into his pocket to reassure her.

"It's all right now. I'm not going to harm you, if you will just keep
quiet. Is that clear to you?"

"Is it money you want? All the money I have is on that dressing-table.
Take it and go."

He shook his head, now observing the wealth of hair, the healthy,
aristocratic poise of shoulders and arms, and the depths of her eyes.

"I'm not a burglar. I don't want your money."

"Well, then, what do you want?" She was beginning to be impatient.

There was a sound of rapid steps down the corridor. Jarvis sprang
toward the door, his eyes still intent on hers.

"Listen ... they're coming!... They mustn't search this room--do you
understand--you must put them off." He assured himself that the upper
bolt was intact and shot tightly. "I'm not what you think I am.... Is
there no way out that way, through the door over there behind you?"

She shook her head.

"No, that is my maid's room."

"The fire-escape--where is that?"

"In the hall opposite."

Jarvis snapped a finger, angry at his own mistake.

"I thought that red meant it was in this room. Oh, hell!... I beg your
pardon!"

A faint smile turned up the corner of the red lips, and she shrugged
her shoulders ever so lightly.

"Well, you know where it is now; why don't you go?"

Jarvis shook his head with determination: it was evident that this
surprised and surprising young person would be amenable to reason--he
had many logical reasons at his command.

"I can't go that way--they'll be waiting in the hall," he declared, as
he studied the windows and portals. "The red light in the corridor
fooled me--I thought the fire-escape would get me to the floor below,
where I could take an elevator down during the hubbub. There they come
again."

As the odd pair stood, with bated breath, quick steps and a running
fire of conversation could be heard in the hall. It was evident that
the chase was getting warm.

The girl studied the pose of her curious visitor--it was not the
cringing attitude of a criminal. In the lines of his well-built figure
there was the unmistakable grace of a gentleman to the manor born--the
fearless confidence, despite his predicament, of a man confident of his
own justification.

She was puzzled--her curiosity gradually overcoming her outraged
feelings and her natural resentment against his assured usurpation of
the situation.

This was a new experience for the lady of the lacy filaments and regal
poise; yet it was far from unpleasant to meet such calm masculinity.
She switched on the light once more, to feel a surprising satisfaction
in the impersonal, unabashed honesty of those steady blue eyes.

Jarvis became conscious of a twinge in his hand, and looking down at
his left hand, observed a little rivulet of blood dripping down to his
finger-tips. He quickly drew his handkerchief from his pocket, as
though to cover the wound before she saw it. The action and its motive
did not escape the observant dark eyes. Her sex asserted itself; she
advanced, nervous once more.

"You are wounded? What has really happened? You must dress that hand
..."

"I almost stopped one of the bullets--that's all. You see it was not
one-sided. But I am afraid it will be, if they get me now. I don't see
how the devil----" here he ran to the shaded window to peer at the
twinkling street lamps far below,----"Oh, damn!"

The girl's manner froze again. She stepped back instinctively; and yet
that bandaged hand compelled her eyes. She spoke slowly.

"You have evidently shot someone, and are making me shield you from
justice."

Warren Jarvis shook his head, with that straightforward look which was
so convincing.

"Not from justice, but from the law?

"I thought they were the same."

His smile was bitter, as he retorted: "No, not always. There would be
no justice for me at the hands of the law: justice was not accomplished
by the law in all these years."

She dropped a white hand to the table by which she stood.

"Well, that is not for me to decide. I must only...."

"You must only listen--you shall decide. At least you shall listen, in
order that you may forgive my intrusion, my selfishness in compromising
you as I have done." He hesitated, and for the first time color came
into the drawn cheeks; a softening echo was observable in her own. "If
you find me guilty, when I tell you, I'll--well--I'll take that door or
anything you say."

"Your presumption is ridiculous," were her words, and yet she did not
call for assistance. Jarvis realized that he had at least won a
foothold for his plea. And he had not given up his dogged hope.

"I wouldn't call it ridiculous--a man has a right to argue for his
life."

"But," she parried, "could any decision be more unjust than mine must
be, when delivered at the point of a pistol?"

Jarvis took the challenge. He laid the weapon upon the dressing-table
by her side and crossed the room, leaving her between himself and the
door.

"Now, my dear lady, there's nothing to prevent you from covering me,
calling for help, and solving the riddle as you please. After all, what
does it matter, whether the end comes to-day or to-morrow, for it would
be impossible to elude the police. You don't understand, I know--but I
am not flying from justice: it was a case of shoot or be shot. You will
notice that only one cartridge in that revolver has been used. But,
listen--they're on the right trail at last."

He noiselessly crossed to the door and listened to the renewed
excitement without. There was a triple knock, and the voice of a man,
evidently of authority, rang out.

"Open up here. Is there anybody in here? Open, I tell you."

Jarvis turned toward the girl, whose face reflected a dozen curious
emotions as she watched him. He made his last appeal.

"It's up to you to do with me as you like," he murmured.

Her mind was made up quickly, and she pointed toward a door to the
left--it led to her bath. Jarvis disappeared behind its shelter. At the
same instant the door of the maid's room opened, and a chic little
servant ran out chattering, clinging to her mistress' arm for
protection.

"Be silent," was the cool command. The knocking continued, with more
voices joining in the exhortations. The girl pointed to the door, and
the silent command was obeyed. Trembling like an aspen, the little maid
opened it, and the burly form of a house detective appeared at the
entrance.

"Are you all right in here?" he asked, and then observing the two
white-robed figures he doffed the conventional derby hat without which
no professional hotel detective would seem natural. "I beg your pardon,
ma'am. I just came to see if you had had any trouble."

"No," replied the mistress calmly. "What is the matter?"

"Mighty sorry to trouble you, but we're looking for a party and we
ain't goin' to stop till we find him. We just thought he might have
beat it into this room for a getaway. If you want anything, just call
us, for we'll be up and down these halls all night now."

As he shut the door, the unusual young woman waved toward it once more.

"Lock it well, Nita," she said in Spanish. "Control yourself, child.
You have a chill. Go to bed again. I will not want you again until six
o'clock in the morning."

As Nita retired she hesitated before her doorway. Her sharp black eyes
caught the glint of the bulky revolver upon the library table. Those
same black eyes dilated, her lips moved as though for another
frightened exclamation, but all she said was: "Thank you, madame! I
will not bother you again until six o'clock. Good-night, madame!"

Then she closed her door.

Nita was as discreet as she was faithful, in the service of her beloved
madame. And she was essentially Spanish in her appreciative grasp of a
romantic situation.




IV

AN OATH OF ALLEGIANCE


The bathroom door opened slowly, with the slightest perceptible knock.

"May I come in?" was the low and meek inquiry.

"You may, and then you may go out as soon as possible," was the
resolute response.

Warren's countenance was smiling again, and the smile was infectious.
So curious had been this burglarizing method of escape, so unusual the
imperturbable girl who had assisted him against all conventional
expectations, that the horror of the last half-hour was partially
dissipated. When a man meets a great crisis of his life and overcomes
it, there is a queer relaxation of strained nerves,--with a woman the
result would be hysteria; with a man of Warren Jarvis' type it was a
self-surprising amiability and calmness.

"Would you mind bolting the door again? He might return. And thank you
very much for delaying the death sentence--now I can explain."

The girl glided to the door and tested the lock. It was secure, and she
turned about to return that infectious smile of the eyes, albeit
grudgingly.

Warren, finally realizing that he was weak from strain, and aching in
every muscle from the ordeal of the past twenty-four hours, looked
appealing at the comfortable armchair.

"May I sit down for just a minute?" he pleaded. "I have not slept since
the night before last. I have not rested for a fortnight."

The girl nodded. He relaxed, and dropped into a blessed position of
comfort. He buried his face in his hands--how many times had he struck
this same attitude since the bitter days at Meadow Green, without
realizing the repetition!

For two minutes or an hour he sat there--he knew not which. His
companion, with sudden renewal of consciousness of the _d√©shabille_ of
her dressing-gown, retreated to the corner of the brass bed. She sat
down, to scrutinize the better this strange intruder. The moonlight
which fell in pale green bars across the Bokhara beneath her slippered
feet; the melodramatic situation which had brought them together; the
unmistakable gentility of this compelling intruder of her maidenly
domain; the curious collapse of his aggressiveness--all these things
united to cast a sympathetic spell over her. She was foolish--to the
extreme of placing herself in a ridiculous situation! She was
culpable--in protecting a self-confessed butcher! She was weak--in
yielding to girlish sentiment by permitting this man to shatter the
conventionalities,--she who had been accustomed, throughout her twenty
years of adulation and awe-inspiring respect, to a servile respect from
every man, woman, and child! And, worst of all to an essentially
feminine mind, she had allowed this presumptuous, calculating stranger
to override her better judgment, to subjugate her resistance, without a
visible tribute to the charms which had stirred the masculine souls of
a continent!

And yet, in spite of--perhaps, _because of_--all these illogical,
provoking, equilibrium-shattering irritants--she sat there, patiently,
eagerly awaiting an explanation. Consistency, thy name is not
Maidenhood!

Suddenly he looked at her.

"Do you know what a feud is?" was the curious prologue.

Her answer was apt and surprising.

"Feud? Spain is the garden of feuds."

"So is Kentucky. That's where I'm from. You're Spanish, then?"

"Yes!"

"Then you'll understand and sympathize.... Those shots you heard ended
a feud which has lived through three or four generations. They brought
me back to earth, to life, to a realization of things about me, after
the most horrible nightmare through which I've ever passed. I know my
own name now,--and I had almost forgotten it since I went back home--so
short a time, so many centuries ago!"

Then Warren Jarvis told her the story; his eyes were half closed, and
with his fingers clasped and intertwined beneath his square-chiseled
chin he recounted the steps of the recent event with the monotone of
one who chants a mechanically memorized tale. She understood at last.

"But what did he do when you went to his room in the hotel?"

"Just what I expected--in fact, what I prayed for! As the door opened
he fired his revolver--and I carry the witness inside this crimson
handkerchief. I had my own weapon in my coat pocket ... it's a trick I
learned in Central American revolutions. I fired from my waist, burned
a hole in my overcoat--and burned a hole in the heart of that murderous
hound."

Suddenly he sprang to his feet and walked to the window, just as he had
done back in Meadow Green so short a time before.

"Dad, dear old dad! I know you're satisfied. I let him take the first
chance, and it was his last."

He was silent. The girl twisted the dressing-gown in her slender,
nervous fingers. She waited for him to speak. He turned about, and
dropped his hands, palm outward, as he quietly ended it all with the
question: "Now, can you understand why the law would not give me
justice?"

"Is he dead--are you sure?"

"I didn't wait--I came ... to ... visit you. Now are you going to drive
me out?... You don't know what it is to fight single-handed against
fearful odds. That's how I planned to spend my summer. To fight the
endless fight alone...."

She leaned forward eagerly as she answered: "Oh, yes, I do! I know what
it means.... I, too, have been fighting against fearful odds!"

Jarvis looked at her sharply.

"There is no man to fight for you?"

"No man who dares."

"Oh, God! If there had only been a woman left for me to fight for!...
But with my mother gone it was simply a hopeless, desperate
determination to square the score at any cost, and then cry 'Quits!'
and care nothing."

She drew back, studying the outline of his agile body, as he stood
silhouetted against the moonlight.

"And are you alone?"

"Alone."

"And if you're caught," there was a curious eagerness in her low voice,
"it means payment with your life?"

"Yes!"

"Suppose that I decided to help you--to do more than I have done?"

Jarvis discarded his fatalism, as he caught at this loophole.

"What do you mean?"

"You have no fear of death? You are not afraid of ghosts?"

"Ghosts? Don't joke with me. I am an American."

"Yes--ghosts--they are not confined to America, or China, or Africa. I
mean Spanish ghosts."

Jarvis' laugh was almost bitter, as he responded with a tense
earnestness:

"After to-night I am not afraid of the living or the dead. What are you
thinking about?"

After a hesitation, poignant in its baffling anxiety, she rose and
walked toward him, absolutely forgetful of their curious meeting and
their lack of a common ground of interest.

"If you escape from here, it will be because I helped you. We might
say, I saved your life,--if what you tell me is true and if I do it
from a selfish motive entirely, I am justified. I have work for you ...
hard, dangerous work, and as I am frank, it may mean your life in the
end. It's a chance, and you have nothing to lose."

"And if I agree?"

"You will begin by taking the ancient feudal oath of my country."

"Isn't my word enough? I'm a Kentuckian, you know."

"But I insist."

Jarvis smiled indulgently.

"Very well--I'll swear the blackest oath you can utter." His eyes
twinkled. "Let's hear it all now."

The girl drew back her shoulders haughtily. It was apparent that she
took this curious idea more seriously than the prelude would suggest.

"What is your name?"

"Jarvis."

"All of it?"

"Warren Jarvis."

She raised her hands, to the Kentuckian's surprise.

"Kneel then, Warren of Jarvis!... No, not that way,--on one knee only!"

"I beg your pardon." Jarvis began to feel ridiculous, in spite of
himself. But there were reasons for humoring this curious beauty. The
footsteps were still audible in the hall.

"Now repeat this oath: I, Warren of Jarvis" (he followed word for
word), "Se√±or of all the domains, fiefs, keeps, and marches of Warren
of Kentucky..."

"Whew!" and he stifled a laugh as he echoed the words.

The girl continued: "Do convey to Maria Theresa, of Aragon, all my
worldly titles and possessions..."

"Sounds like I were marrying her--I beg your pardon. 'Do convey to
Maria Theresa, of Aragon, all my worldly titles and possessions!'"

The shade of a smile played over his features.

The girl caught his hand in hers, placed her left in both of his, and
then continued: "And receive them back as vassal and retainer and to
faithfully fight in my lady's cause, according to the feudal laws of
Castile and Aragon!"

[Illustration: --"_and to faithfully fight in my lady's cause_"]

As he finished the repetition, she added: "Arise, vassal!"

With the spirit of the ceremony, he jestingly caught her hand and
kissed it, as he arose. She drew back sharply.

"That is part of the ceremony, but I meant to omit it."

Warren Jarvis laughed provokingly.

"That seemed to me the only sensible part of it--again I beg your
pardon. But who on earth is this Maria Theresa of Aragon person whose
hired man I have become?"

The girl drew herself up with a hauteur which could never have been
imitated upon the stage. Her dark eyes glinted coldly as she replied:
"I--I am her Serene Highness--Maria Theresa--Princess of Aragon!"

Jarvis looked at her, waiting for the cue to the joke. She was serious.
It was all so unreal, so ridiculous--and yet back there on the floor of
the room down the corridor lay Jim Marcum. This mad, sad,
heart-rending, adventure must have driven him to insanity. He rubbed
his brow, looked out of the window, heard the unromantic honk-honk of a
piratical night-owl taxicab on the street so far below. He steadied his
mental equilibrium, and looked again at the self-possessed young woman,
whose regal manner was as convincing as all the other details were
unconvincing. On the table lay a fortune in jewels and rings and a
necklace. He had not noticed them before. He remembered the Spanish
conversation which he had heard through the bathroom door. He realized
from the size and elegance of the rooms that this must indeed be a
regal suite in the great hotel.

And the girl's steady look never wavered.

American humor, in the presence of royalty, came to his aid in this
staggering blow to his credence.

"Good-_night_! You a Princess ... and I've been ordering you around
with a gun! Great Scott ... what _next_?"




V

EXIT JARVIS, LAUGHING


The Princess turned toward the door, for a step could be heard in the
corridor.

"Before that official returns we must have a plan. I thought it out
while you were behind the door. But, perhaps, it will be too hard a
task for you."

"I'll try it. Anything to get out of here! And I would like to know
what it is you want me to do for you--what about the ghost?"

"I will tell you in good time. Just now for your escape. It is getting
late, and the hours are speeding past. You are in a hopeless trap here.
Now, my trunk..."

"What about it?"

"I am sending it on board the _Mauretania_ at six o'clock, and no one
could possibly suspect."

Jarvis turned to study this curious vehicle of transportation. It was a
strong, well-built piece of baggage, indeed; but to be cooped up in it,
at the mercy of baggageman and truckman, hoisters and stewards--the
thought was staggering.

"You're joking," he began, but she resolutely shook her wealth of hair.

"It's the only chance, and a daring one at that. I am jeopardizing my
own safety by assisting you. Surely, if life is so uncertain for you at
best, you cannot lose by a trial."

Jarvis stooped over it, and began lifting out the trays, to study the
questionable roominess of the interior.

"What about these?" he asked, and as he spoke a locket dropped to the
floor. The girl darted forward to pick it up, and Jarvis observed it
for the first time. Her solicitude seemed unusual to the Kentuckian.

"Did I break something?"

"No. It's nothing. I mean, it's all right. It's just a locket. I broke
it myself yesterday, on purpose. It means a great deal to me, and
perhaps to you. Some day you may know the reason why ... Shall we send
the trays to the steamer by messenger?"

Jarvis thought for an instant. Here was such an utterly improbable
method of escape, such a strange new twirl in his whirlpool of
adventure, that he had to find his bearings.

"I have it now," he explained. "You had better telephone--we must have
someone we can trust implicitly."

The Princess crossed toward the desk telephone on the small table by
her bed, and looked at him inquiringly.

"Ask the operator to connect you with the Hotel Belmont. That's just
across the street. My room is 417. Rusty, my servant, is there. He is
waiting for some word from me, as he knew the possibilities when I met
Jim Marcum. He can be counted on till Judgment Day and then a few hours
afterwards! Tell him to come here at once--mention my first name only,
with no other explanation--that will bring him and give no other clew
to an outsider. You never can tell about a telephone. But fortunately,
I registered there under a different name. Try it now."

The girl had the receiver off the hook. After a short delay she was
talking directly with the faithful servitor, whose trembling voice
betokened his anxiety. But Rusty was too sage to ask too many
questions--he had served in affairs of delicacy before this.

"Hello--is this Mr. Rusty?... Yes? Well, listen carefully. You are to
come right over to the Manhattan Hotel across the street and a bellboy
will be waiting for you at the desk. He is to bring you up to room
1121."

Jarvis interrupted: "Tell him to keep his mouth shut!"

The Princess balked at the colloquialism.

"And--and--don't talk to anyone ... What's that?... Oh, yes.
'_Warren._'... There, he'll be coming over immediately."

Jarvis, the executive, was now in action.

He had emptied the trunk as she was talking, tossing out fascinating
feminine mysteries of lace and silks, with a nonchalance which brought
a twinkle into the dark eyes. He turned again.

"Hurry, now--call up the clerk downstairs. Tell them to look out for
Rusty and send him up here."

More delicate symphonies of Parisian architecture were thrown on the
floor, and Warren had taken out his pocket-knife.

"Hello, hello," called the Princess. "I'm expecting a man."

"A colored man," was Warren's parenthesis.

"Yes,... a colored man ... to get some bundles. He will come right to
the desk ... please send him up at once ... It is very important."

The Princess observed Jarvis' attempt to bore a hole in the side of the
trunk. He was laboring diligently, until the blade snapped.

"Confound it!"

"Why are you doing that?"

"I must breathe, you know ... Now, how can I cut a hole in the blessed
thing?" He scratched his forehead in a quandary.

The Princess brought him her shears from the dresser. In a few minutes
he had made two openings which seemed to satisfy him, but it had been
no easy task.

"What time does the boat sail?"

"Nine o'clock."

"Good. That will give Rusty time to get aboard with these trays and my
baggage. Let me see, it is a quarter of six now--how quickly the dawn
has slipped in!"

There was a knock on the outer door, and Jarvis again disappeared
behind the bathroom portal, with instinctive caution.

At a call from the Princess, the door opened after she had slid back
the upper bolt. The girl stepped back abashed at the appearance of the
excited negro. Rusty rolled his eyes, suspiciously taking in the
contents of the room.

"Whar's Marse Warren?" and his voice was hoarse. Jarvis stepped into
view. "Lawd bless you, Marse Warren. I done thought dat Marcum got you
dis time."

"Never mind what you thought. Help me wrap up these trays. We sail for
Europe in two hours."

Rusty gasped, shot another big-eyed look at the beautiful girl and then
at his master.

"Two hours--good Lawd!--you mean WE?"

The Princess was holding out a steamer rug in silence.

"Yes, Rusty, you and I. Here, give me a hand with this rug," and with
the aid of his servant he made a quick job of the bundling. "Now, take
these--with our baggage from the Belmont--to the steamship _Mauretania_
of the Cunard line. Buy accommodations.... Mind, you won't see me until
after we get out to sea. You stay in your stateroom and sit tight until
you hear from me."

He took out his wallet.

"You understand now? Cunard line. You can find it some way--just take a
taxi, and get there as fast as you can. The clerk at the hotel will get
the tickets over the telephone, and you can pay him when you settle for
the whole bill, with that other money I gave you. Now, get hold of this
money, and keep hold of it. No gin now, Rusty!"

He turned around, and observed the amused surprise on the face of his
fair companion.

"I beg your pardon.... This is Rusty;--Rusty, this is the Princess of
Aragon...."

Rusty bowed.

"Howdy do, Mrs. Princess!"

"There, that will do. Is it all clear for you now?"

"Yassir. I takes everything to the steamboat--gets
accommo--accommo--wall, I knows what you means, Marse Warren, if I
cain't spell it. I gets them things for us and Mrs. Princess."

The girl reddened under the beaming smile, but Jarvis quickly
interceded.

"Not for the Princess; just for us two. What's the name of the boat?"

"The _Mary Tania_!"

"That'll do. Now be off, and don't get left behind."

As Rusty made his exit with the bulky bundle, the Princess smiled:
"Good-by, Rusty," and he bobbed his head with a broader grin than ever
as he disappeared down the corridor toward the elevator.

"Time nearly up," muttered Warren, as he took off his coat. "Pardon the
disrobing--but I'll be more at ease in my shirt-sleeves. It's a stingy
little room to spend three hours in. I'll lie this way, with my head
toward this corner. Remember, this trunk must not go into the hold of
the ship--have it marked 'Wanted' and 'This End Up.' I'll take the
shears along and cut another hole from the inside if it gets too
suffocating."

The girl walked to the table and picked up the revolver, which she held
out.

"You'd better take this, too."

"How do you know you can trust me now?"

There was a veiled irony in her retort, although it was accompanied by
a smile: "I don't. I have to take that chance. I have no other choice
at this late hour."

"You must have a pretty good reason for it in the back of your head.
But what about this ghost? I may never hear the sequel. At least give
me some food for thought during my travels in the dark."

"Are you afraid?"

"Lord, no! I merely wanted to know. Well, I'll wait. But, now, honest
Injun, as we say down in Kentucky, are you a really, sure-enough
princess?"

"Why do you ask that?"

"Oh, I don't know. Somehow you are not quite like what I thought a
princess would be.... I mean, you're different from the popular
conception of a royal person. Your English is so perfect."

"I learned it in an English boarding-school."

"Your informality--for it has been put to a severe test these last few
hours,--your adaptability,--you have more understanding, more sympathy,
more heart."

She turned away and tilted a haughty chin.

"In that last respect, sir, you will find me quite like the popular
conception."

A knocking on the door interrupted further interchanges on the
peculiarities of royalty. Jarvis clambered inside the vehicle of his
escape, and drew down the lid, with a farewell smile.

"Trunks, lady, for the steamer!" came the voice of the porter, as he
resumed his thumping on the door panel.

"Just a minute." The Princess hurriedly bundled up the scattered
garments, jumbling them upon the bed. She turned the key in the trunk
and, with a quick feminine survey of the field for damaging, overlooked
evidence, called to her maid.

"Nita, admit the porter."

The servant appeared with surprising promptness. The man pushed in his
truck, with the obsequious manner which is a prelude to the smirking
appreciation of a handsome gratuity.

"Have the other trunks gone, my good man?" queried her Serene Highness.

"Yes'm. Last night, mum."

"This trunk goes on a special wagon."

"Yes'm."

At this juncture the house detective appeared at the doorway. He
stopped and looked questioningly at the broken lock. He was alert as a
weasel despite his ponderous physique: he fingered it, and studied the
evidence of fresh splinters. The Princess continued calmly.

"Have it marked 'Wanted'" (and as she indicated with a jeweled finger),
"'This End up with Care.'"

The porter nodded.

"I'll put special stickers on it, mum. You'll find it in your stateroom
when you get to the steamer. Is that all, mum?"

"Handle it gently, porter."

"Shure, lady and I never smashed one in me life! I'll handle it as
rivirintly as if it held the relics of a saint, mum. I'm that careful
in me worruk. So don't worry one little bit, mum."

As he started out with the heavy piece of luggage on his truck, the
detective stopped him sternly.

"Just a minute. How did that lock get broken?"

[Illustration: "_Just a minute. How did that lock get broken?_"]

The Princess felt herself changing color, yet she shrugged her
shoulders as she turned away.

Nita suddenly chattered in Spanish to her, and the detective shot a
sharp glance at the girl.

"What does she say?" he cried. "She knows something about it."

"She says the other porter banged the door before we came in, for it
was that way when she entered to arrange my clothes. I have had my
sleep interrupted all night long, and I do not care for any insolence
now."

The detective looked a bit sheepish, but stuck to his inquest.

"When did you come?"

"Yesterday."

"And when do you go away?"

"We sail this morning for Europe."

"Huh," and there was a suggestion of doubt in his grunt. "The police
are making an investigation in the hotel. They would like to have a
look at these rooms. Do you mind?"

"Not at all. My maid will show them around."

"What time do you sail? Does this trunk go on board?"

"Yes,--I want it sent on a special wagon, for I fear we will be late.
The steamer sails at nine o'clock."

The detective nodded to the porter, who brushed close by the Princess
with his cargo.

"_Bon voyage!_" she said with a smile.

"What's that?" asked the detective.

"I merely called my maid. You're an unusually impertinent and
inquisitive man. In my country gentlewomen are shown some degree of
courtesy, even by hotel servants," she remarked icily.

The detective's ruddy face grew redder.

"Well, I dunno about your country, whatever that is. But in this
country, and in this hotel there don't nothin' get by me. That's all.
Come on in, boys."

Two bluecoats entered the room, gazed awkwardly about, and walked to
the window to peer down at the street. Then they passed out, not
without, it must be admitted, an envious glance at the collection of
jewels on the table.

As the door closed behind them, her Serene Highness turned toward Nita,
as she relaxed in the chair by the dressing-table.

"You may dress my hair, child. I wonder how the door was broken?"

"Ah, madame," was the guileless response. "_Qui√©n sabe?_"




VI

OVER THE SEA AND FAR AWAY


That journey to the _Mauretania_ was never to be forgotten by Warren
Jarvis; and yet so weird, bruising, jumbling, and altogether horrible
was it, that he could never distinctly remember its details.

With hands stretched tensely against the corners of the trunk, he
warded off as best he could the shocks of the skilled baggage-breakers
along the route. Again and again, an unexpected twist would bang his
throbbing head against the adamantine sides, and with a wince, a sharp,
in-drawn breath, he would hold himself "together" for one more bump!

The air was stifling; yet the foresight of cutting the holes gave him
enough oxygen to maintain his senses. At last, after √¶ons of suffering
which reminded him of nothing so much as his initiation into the
college fraternity, he felt himself being dragged up the side of the
great ocean greyhound.

More jolts, more rolls and bangs, and at last, with muscles wrenched, a
swollen forehead and nerves aquiver, there was rest.

"I'm in her cabin at last--and now for a graceful exit!" he told
himself, with an enforced jocularity. But this was no easy task. He
spent a full half-hour, working and prying with the shears against the
lock which imprisoned him with indomitable force from the outside of
the iron-and-leathern prison.

Upon the outer deck of the great turbiner, the Princess nervously
fought her way through the great throng of voyagers and their friends.
Nita was close by her side. It seemed impossible to capture a steward
who was not busy with the bearing of bouquets and wine baskets. In
other circumstances this young personage would have been furious at the
lack of respect which she had been educated to expect from the throngs
of her own country.

But to-day her only anxiety was to find her elusive quarters for the
strange cruise, to learn whether or not her new knight-errant were
alive or dead from the rigors of his escape.

At last, with the aid of an extravagant _largesse_, she was conducted
to her staterooms.

As she entered the parlor of her luxurious suite, the first sight which
caught her eye was the trunk, inverted! The printed sign of direction,
"This End up with Care," were upside down!

She gasped, and looked nervously about to note the expression upon the
face of Nita. That young woman was busy studying the handsome features
of the ingratiating bedroom-steward. So engrossed was she that she
stumbled over the elevated sill of the door from the promenade deck.

"Oh, I'm so sorry, miss!" apologized the steward. "Did you hurt
yourself? These doors are always troublesome until you get used to
them. But they are necessary to keep out the water in rough weather."

The Princess was thinking only of the opportunity to open the fateful
trunk.

"You don't anticipate a bad passage, steward?"

"Rather uncertain, ma'am, at this time of the year," and he busied
himself adjusting the hand luggage and arranging the chairs. "But your
location is good. You'll find the _Mauretania_ as steady as a parish
church. Here is the clothes press, ma'am, and the other rooms are off
there. It's quite the finest suite on the boat, ma'am."

The steward looked about ingratiatingly, then he turned toward the
door.

"If you want anything, ma'am--there is the telephone.... I'll place
your trunk, if you please, ma'am!"

He started to drag the trunk to the side of the cabin, but the Princess
intervened.

"That's all right; you may place it later. But you _might_ fix it right
side up!"

The steward turned it, as the girl breathed a sigh of relief.

"I'm so sorry, ma'am. I hope the contents are not upset."

"I hope not."

"Anything else, ma'am?"

"No, not now, steward? How soon do we sail?"

"Very soon," and as he spoke there came the stentorian warning: "All
ashore that's going ashore!" The call was repeated four times, and the
voice died away in the distance of the long promenade deck.

With a bow, and a significant glance at the attractive maid, the
steward finally dragged himself out of the attractive cabin. The
Princess sank nervously into a chair.

"That is all, now, Nita. I have the key to the trunk. I will call you
when I need you."

"Yes, your Highness. But, will your Highness excuse me if I am mistaken
in thinking that I recognized his Excellency the Duke, your exalted
cousin, among the passengers as we came up the gangplank...?"

Her Highness was distinctly startled, but she showed no trace of her
emotion to the servant.

"My cousin--it is impossible. He is at Madrid, where his Majesty the
King is holding Court."

"Yes, your Highness," and she went, but her inflection showed that she
knew herself to be in the right. Nita was too good a servant to argue
with her betters.

"Carlos here? How could he be, I wonder?" and the Princess fumbled with
her keys, until she found the right one. She opened the trunk with a
trembling hand, and began to raise the cover, a quiver in her voice.

"Are you all right ... Mr. Jarvis?"

It was the voice of a nervous, frightened girl--not of a royal
personage--this time.

Just then she heard a knock on the cabin door. There was no time for a
response. "Quiet! Be careful!" she cautioned, _sotto voce_.

As she hurried to the door, she pulled her taut nerves together. There
on the threshold was her kinsman: Nita had been right as usual, in her
sharp way.

Carlos, Duke of Alva, with smiling lips and sinister eyes, greeted her
with the suave courtesy which is so characteristic of his race and
class. He typified the worst of the Spanish folk, even as the young
girl did the best. To a keen student of physiognomy the mental attitude
of the Duke of Alva would have been an open book. To Maria Theresa,
loyal to family and countrymen, he was the symbol of her own strata in
Spain--yet, beneath her gracious forgiveness of and enforced
indifference to many things, there lurked a latent mistrust, which she
had never yet defined in practical, applicable terms.

With white teeth, crisp-curling black hair, and eyes of sparkling
coal-shade, the Duke of Alva bowed with that polished grace which had
broken many a heart and carried him over many a stretch of thin ice, in
the courtly adventuring on the Continent.

"Carlos!" exclaimed the Princess.

"Fair cousin--if I but knew you were as pleased, as you are surprised,
at seeing me!" With the words he advanced and kissed her cold
finger-tips with Old-World punctiliousness.

"What are you doing on the _Mauretania_? Why did you leave Spain,
Carlos?"

As he shut the door he smiled, and now her intuition warned her of the
cunning which lurked behind those pleasantly curving lips.

"First tell me that you are glad to see me! I have come many leagues to
hear those words, Maria!"

"Why.... Why,... of course, I am always glad to see you, cousin."

He simulated a pathetic irony. "You say you are always glad to see
me--and yet, I fear it is not _always_ since my unfortunate quarrel
with your brother. Alas, and that has hardened your heart against me."

The Duke was a suitor of the romantic school: each phrase was studied,
each attitude as obviously planned as a military campaign. It was a
method which had invariably succeeded, until his efforts with the
Princess of Aragon. Yet, he was too satisfied with bygone results to
abandon the time-tried artistries of former victories.

The Princess dropped her eyes before the undeniable questioning of his
burning glances. As she looked away, he assured himself that he had
scored.

"My brother ... what do you know of him, Carlos? When did you see him
last? Have you been in Seguro?"

Two long whistles, and the vibration of the great steamship evidenced
the beginning of the long voyage. The answer to the questions was still
more pathetic in cadence.

"Ah, how I dread telling you!... I was there a few days before leaving
for America. I learned, unfortunately, that despite my very friendly
advice, he had been prowling about that ridiculous old castle again, in
search of the mythical treasure your grandfather is supposed to have
secreted there."

He laughed, and the girl instinctively shuddered with a newborn
distrust. There was no mirth in the sound.

"You heard nothing more? Was he well and safe when you left the town?"

"He was as well and safe as I would consider any man who was prowling
about that castle in a foolhardy way."

She wished to get rid of him: that ominous trunk might contain a dead
man, for all she knew.

"How did you find me? Why did you come to America?"

"What could have brought me here but love and anxiety for you?"

She turned away impatiently and walked toward the cabin porthole.

"Oh, come, Carlos. The ship is almost in mid-stream. Let us go out on
deck, for one last look at America."

"Thank you; I can do very well without it!" he retorted, as he sat down
upon the trunk. "My dear Maria, why do you not desist from this silly
pursuit of an imaginary treasure? What is the value of money--we are
Spaniards, not shirt-sleeved, mercenary pigs of Americans! We strive
for it, only to obtain the happiness and luxury which it brings. Can it
bring any greater happiness than that which I have so many times laid
at your feet--the love and honored name of a man who would protect and
worship you? You have wonderful beauty and family rank. I have power,
influence at Court, and an unconquerable ambition. Mine is the
intellect to conceive, the heart to dare, and the will to complete!
Think what our alliance would mean to us both.... My dear girl--there
is nothing which could halt me, nothing which I could not crush!"

Had many a man made this speech he would have punctuated its
termination with a clenched fist. But the scion of an intriguing
aristocracy bared his teeth in a wolf-like smile as he unsheathed his
sword-cane an inch or two, to snap it back into place, with a snarling
smile in his drooping eyes.

However, the speech and the theatrical delivery of the gifted courtier
were wasted effort. Maria Theresa of Spain was impervious to the
surface sheen: she had seen true metal within the past twenty-four
hours!

"Oh, Carlos--you should have been a novelist or a dramatist! I much
prefer the romantic sky-line of New York harbor to your reminiscence of
Don Quixote!"

The great roar of the turbine vibrated through the ship. She advanced
to the cabin door, and imperiously called to him to follow.

"I insist. I need fresh air.... _We'll be gone ten minutes!_"

And grudgingly the Duke of Alva followed her, with a vicious swish of
his cane at the unoffending trunk.

As the door slammed, the top of the trunk was slowly lifted, and the
battered, bleeding face of Warren Jarvis might have been visible above
the iron ridge of its lock bar.

Stiffly he drew himself out of the trunk, to blink in the unaccustomed
light.

"O,... O.... O.... Oh! Lord!... If I only had that last baggageman by
the neck!"

He bent forward and back to limber an apparently paralyzed spinal
column.

"Well, I'm all here!"

He stumbled across the cabin, where he helped himself to a welcome
drink of water. He tenderly caressed the bruised elbows, and breathed
hard.

"I'm _most_ all here!"

He looked down at his twisted, cracked patent-leather shoes.

"My feet are bent--they'll never get well!"

He sat limply down on the top of the trunk, and fumbling in his hip
pocket drew forth a bent and battered cigarette case. As he struck a
light to inhale a few welcome, cheering puffs, he looked about his
strange surroundings with the old, unconquerable Jarvis spirit.

"A Princess--a Duke--a castle--a treasure! Well, well! But the problem
is: _Where the devil do I fit in_?"




VII

THE ROMANCE OF THE CASTLE


Warren hobbled painfully to the telephone on the wall. This connected
with a central switchboard from which he knew he could reach his own
stateroom--provided Rusty had not failed in his trust.

"Great Scott! Suppose it is impossible to get accommodations! I'll have
to ride as a stowaway in the hold, after all!" he thought.

At any rate he knew that the ten minutes were rapidly dissipating, and
from what he had learned by eavesdropping through the trunk, the Duke
was not the kindliest person in the world for a man in such a
predicament.

"Hello!" he called. "Hello, there.... Yes. I want the stateroom of Mr.
Jarvis.... Yes, Warren Jarvis.... No, I don't know the number of the
room.... All right."

There was a pause, and he improved the opportunity to unlimber his arms
and legs, while waiting by the instrument. At last came the welcome
voice with the African accents: "Yassir, hello. Who do you want?"

"Hello, Rusty!... Good boy.... Listen, come up to this stateroom, and
bring me an overcoat and a scarf. Yes, and bring me a damp towel with
some soap on it. Yes, and stick a comb into the coat pocket."

"Law, boss, I dunno whar you-all is?"

"That's right. Wait a minute." He opened the door to the cabin
passageway, and squinted at the number plate. Back again to the
telephone he continued: "Stateroom A, Promenade deck.... And bring up
that big bundle in the steamer rug. Quick now."

Jarvis hung up the receiver and walked stiffly to the window, peering
out at the disappearing shores.

"Well, good-by, Uncle Sam. I don't know when I'll see you again. And as
for you, Miss Liberty--I don't believe there will be any of your
sisters or cousins around this precious castle where Fate is taking me.
I don't know which of us two is the craziest--this Duke or myself."
Then, after a pause, he added, "Well, his taste is not to be sneered
at; that's certain."

There was a knock at the door. Warren was uncertain as to the wisest
thing to do. He called: "Go away--we're all very ill!" Then he darted
for one of the side staterooms.

But the door opened slowly, and the plump physiognomy of Rusty Snow
appeared. Rusty stumbled awkwardly over the elevated threshold,
dropping the large bundle, landing prone on the deck.

"Wha'f-f-foh they want to build a dern fool door like that?" complained
Rusty, scrambling up with a bruised shin, the tenderest spot of a
negro.

His master worked feverishly, untying the trays and fitting them into
the trunk from which he had tardily removed his dress coat, and the
revolver. Then he smiled at Rusty.

"How in de name of Moses did you-all git on de steamboat, Marse
Warren?" was his servant's next remark, as he helped on with the coat
over the painful shoulders.

"I came in the trunk--and it was almost as good traveling as some of
those mountain railroads back in Kentucky. Quick, hand me that
towel--my face is bleeding."

A few quick movements, the use of the comb, and he looked more
presentable, resembling Jarvis the clubman once again.

"Did you see any signs of the police, Rusty?"

"No, sir. Nary a sign."

"Are you sure?"

"Dead sartin, Marse Warren."

"Did you look?"

"No, sir. I cain't say as I did. I wasn't anxious to look."

The door opened, with a suddenness which caused both men to jump. It
was the Princess. She smiled with relief as she saw the rehabilitation.

"How de do, Mrs. Princess?" was Rusty's polite greeting, with a bow.
His formality was growing more impressive, as the acquaintance
extended. Here was "quality" indeed--Rusty was a judge of "breed"!

"How do you do, Rusty?" and she laughed girlishly.

Then she turned toward her vassal. He wore a quizzical, friendly, and
amusingly pathetic look. The bruises of his trip were evident upon the
clear-cut features.

"I am so glad that you made it all right. But how they must have bumped
and banged and wabbled and whirled you!"

"I believe I could go over Niagara Falls in a barrel now, without
turning a hair."

She saw the hand--with its red wound. She winced, and reached for the
hand, womanlike.

"Oh, that's dreadful. You must have it attended at once. Let me get
something."

Warren stoically drew it away from the gentle touch of the white
fingers.

"Oh, it's all right. The ship's surgeon will welcome a little
professional exercise. I'll be the first patient, as we're not out far
enough for the seasickness practice yet."

He turned toward Rusty, who was making a mental comparison of the room
with the steamboat cabins back on the Ohio River. Rusty decided that
even the old _Gallia Queen_, in her palmiest days, could not have been
much more resplendent than this "foreign" boat!

"You can go back and rest yourself, Rusty," suggested Jarvis. "And,
listen--what's the number of the stateroom?"

"Seven-twenty-nine, sir."

"How did you get the tickets, in my name? I was registered differently
at the other hotel."

"Oh, I jest told 'em dey was for Mr. R. Snow, a rich Southern
gentleman. When I gits down here, I tells Mr. Snow has decided to send
his repersentative! Den I had de name changed--dat's all, Marse
Warren."

Maria Theresa smiled again, and Rusty accepted it as a supreme
compliment.

"You are a diplomat, Rusty," she said.

"No, lady--I mean, Mrs. Princess.... I'm a Republican," and Rusty
started for the door.

"Go lock yourself in there, and don't talk to anyone. Remember you are
deaf and dumb. Understand, deaf and dumb!"

"Yassir--dumb's de word!"

As the door closed behind him, the girl turned toward Jarvis, a
troubled cloud overshadowing her pleasant features.

"There is something I must tell you ... my cousin, the Duke of Alva, is
on board of the _Mauretania_."

He smiled whimsically as he replied, "Yes, and he professes to love you
devotedly."

She flushed furiously, and looked at the pattern of the rug.

"You overheard?"

"I underheard. The trunk was not my idea but yours, you know.... You're
afraid of that man, too. What's the trouble? He's very sure of himself,
isn't he?"

The girl hesitated, and then replied almost timidly:

"Carlos is very powerful.... I may be driven into his hands."

"You mean he may make you marry him?"

"Yes ... if you fail," and she cast an apprehensive glance toward the
door to the promenade deck.

"If I fail," and Warren was dumbfounded, even after the unreal scenes
which had prologued this situation. "If _I_ fail. What do you mean?
Wait a minute--let me get my bearings: things are coming too fast and
furious for my poor intelligence.... I--you--the Duke--how do I fit
in?"

The girl tried to regain her composure.

"You mustn't ask now: take things for granted until we can explain them
together, alone. He may come in any minute. I can tell you before we
get to the castle."

Warren lost his patience.

"I think I should know about this castle nonsense now. I admit you
saved me from the police last night--although undoubtedly they may be
on board the ship now, for we have not passed the three-mile limit yet.
Can't you be frank with me, in spite of that ridiculous oath of
allegiance which I took?"

"It was not ridiculous, Mr. Jarvis. It was in life-and-death
earnestness. I would not have felt that I could truly trust you unless
you had gone through that. Remember, I am a product of a different
civilization from your own: I am still superstitious, if you please to
term it so, in the Old-World sense. I speak your language, and indeed
think in it with you. But back in the inner shrine of my being I am a
Spanish woman, true to my heredity. You are essentially an
American--droll, well-balanced, cynical--and oblivious to any other
national psychology than your own."

The girl's earnestness was droll.

"I am a bit hard and unsympathetic," agreed Warren softly. "I did not
mean to be so. You and I came into each other's lives in a wild unreal
way which an outsider would hardly believe possible. The truest thing
in real life is its melodramatic, unbelievable unrealism. That's where
the novelists, the poets, and the play-makers have a terrific handicap
against them. Things which happen every day would be ridiculed in
print. The great rule of actual existence is: 'It _can't_ be possible,
but it _is_!' But, while we have time, tell me my cues, for I share
your opinion of the Duke of Alva. I would never nominate him for
President!"

The girl wrung her hands nervously--the first signs he had seen of a
spiritual weakening.

"I am completely in the dark," added Jarvis; "I'm just a plain man, not
a mindreader. Let's get down to brass tacks!"

She did not understand the local idiom. But she realized that at last
she had found a sympathetic confessor.

"I hardly know where to begin. It seems absurd--in this pleasant
day-lit stateroom--to talk of ghosts. But the fact is that my family
castle is haunted."

Jarvis was lighting another cigarette from the battered silver case; he
burned his fingers, as he studied her, in surprise. Then he laughed
provokingly. "So I gathered from your amiable cousin. What kind of
specters? Of the Hamlet variety or the old maid brand?"

She answered very seriously.

"Call it anything you like. But my castle is haunted, just the same.
This is absolutely a case of facts, which mean so much to me that I
would not exaggerate _now_! My grandfather was one of the wealthiest
nobles in Spain. When he died my father went to take possession of the
family estates in Seguro. The little town--as you count populations in
America--was buzzing with weird stories of uncanny things and
supernatural happenings in the old castle on the hill. It was deserted,
after centuries of loyal occupancy. All the retainers had deserted
their posts and fled. All told of a weird, horrible thing in armor
which stalked the ancestral halls at night--of agonized groans,
clanking chains, infernal fumes of sulphur--you know how ghost stories
run?"

"I know the ghost stories, and most of the people who tell them run
because of their own yellow streaks!" retorted Warren. "But, go on,
your Highness. It's fascinating--I haven't heard a good 'hant' yarn
since old Mammy Chloe died, back at Meadow Green."

She pouted, for his cynicism struck home. Yet was she earnest, and
again she endeavored to impress him.

"Laugh, sir, as much as you please. My father laughed the same way. He
called them silly, ignorant peasant tales. He said he would show them
that it was now the twentieth century, and teach them how foolish were
their fears."

She hesitated. Her dark eyes burned as she continued slowly: "He went
there, Mr. Jarvis. He went there! He was never seen again!"

The Kentuckian leaned forward, engrossed.

"What happened?"

"No one knows. He disappeared--vanished utterly, without the slightest
clew. Grandfather's treasure was never found!"

"Oh, what treasure?" Jarvis was almost rude in his impatient interest.

"The fortune he left. You know, grandfather converted all his wealth
into Spanish gold to finance a Spanish colonization scheme in the West
Indies. It amounted to about a million dollars in your American money."

Warren whistled, and twisted his intertwined fingers about an elevated
knee--whose ache had been forgotten.

"That's a ripping good yarn. When did all this happen?"

"Fifteen years ago. Since then, two other men disappeared in the same
horrible manner as my father did. Not a trace of their leaving: it is
so horrible that it makes my heart creep to tell it. And yet you
scoff!"

"I'm sorry," he said penitently. "But what's the latest news from the
trenches?"

"Now the Duke tells me that my brother has entered the fatal castle ...
you see that daring runs in the blood! Up to a week ago he had sent me
a cable every day. Everything was well until Sunday. Then his messages
stopped. All this week there has not been a word, not even answering my
cables!"

Warren digested this in silence for a moment.

"Why did your Highness leave Spain, knowing all this?"

"Well, Mr. Jarvis, a part of the legend tells that my grandfather had
drawn a secret map showing exactly where his treasure was located. It
was not safe to let the public know where wealth was located, fifteen
years ago, in Spain."

"From the extremely businesslike devotion of that ghost, it doesn't
seem that conditions have improved in the district of your exalted
estates!"

"Oh, Mr. Jarvis, can't you be serious? I learned from an old letter to
my grandmother, from her husband the Prince, that this plan had been
hidden in the back-clasp of a locket containing her miniature. Without
letting my brother know of the secret, for fear that he would foolishly
tell it, I engaged a secret-service man from Paris to look the matter
up. When my grandparents died, much of the estate was sold--for the
Spanish-American War had wrought havoc with the family income. That
locket had been sold to an American collector, and I came to America
just in time to save it from being sold to some museum. I pawned my
mother's jewels to buy it. That was the locket which dropped from the
trunk, in my bedroom last night."

"And you have the locket?"

"Yes--but not my brother!"

"Ah, then, my particular chore as vassal to this haunted family is to
find your brother and solve the mystery? In other words, you want me to
put this infernal, tin-plated, panhandling ghost out of his misery?"

"Yes ... Mr. Jarvis!" and the Princess was more humble than he had
noticed her during the hours of their acquaintance. "Are you frightened
by the ghost?"

"You asked that question before. Where I came from only negroes and
poor whites fear the departed spirits. Perhaps this spirit is not as
departed as circumstances would indicate. But, how about the Duke? What
is his interest in the ghost?"

"He fears it, too. He has begged me to stay away from the wretched
castle altogether. If it were not for my brother's future, and the
fortune of the family--his family, and perhaps ... my family ... some
day ... I would shun the place. We are not completely destitute, you
know!"

Jarvis studied the luxurious furnishings of the cabin, the jewels and
aristocratic modishness of the girl's attire, and nodded.

"I imagine you're not! But this high, exalted, and altogether superior
cousin of yours is far from being a fool. He will want to know how,
where, why you met me. And what he doesn't know, contrary to the usual
theory, is apt to interfere with his sleep. Beware, your Highness, of
men who cannot sleep o'night--they think altogether too shrewdly!"

The girl was worried.

"He will ask dreadful questions. I know him, Mr. Jarvis!"

"So do I. Will you tell him you have made of me a ... perfectly good
vassal?"

"I think not--just yet," and there was a shyness in her manner.

Jarvis looked adown his nose, and there was a smile on the firm lips
below it!

"By the way, Mrs. Princess--as Rusty so beautifully phrases it--just
how should a vassal, a fine A-number-One vassal, address his liege-lady
and the owner of his soul? What is the _au fait_ procedure in this
case? You know I am only an ignorant pig of an American!"

She hesitated, embarrassed, and then answered: "Highness--is correct!"

"Highness! I had imagined so--incidentally we were introduced by Fate
on the eleventh floor, as I recollect. Tell me, Highness: a vassal
doesn't amount to much, does he? I always considered him a piker!"

She was mystified. These phrases had not been in the curriculum of the
exclusively proper English boarding-school.

"A piker--a soldier who carries a pike?"

"No, just a pawn in this human game of chess--along with the queens,
and kings, and castles--and knights!... But I have known of a pawn
saving a game, in the hands of an expert. By the way, and apropos of
nothing-whatever-at-all, could a good, hard-working, reliable, moral,
union-labeled vassal work his way up to a good job--such as a Duke or a
Lord, or something like that?"

She caught the drift of his quizzical humor, and retorted in kind.

"You're an ambitious vassal. Such men have occasionally lost their
heads--literally speaking. I'm afraid you wouldn't be content with
anything less than a kingship."

The Kentuckian spoke with meaning behind his jest.

"A king--a prince--or a bandit!"

"A bandit--why a bandit? That is essentially Spanish!"

Jarvis lit another cigarette.

"A king could command--a prince might request--a bandit generally
seizes!"

"What?" and the woman emerged from the hauteur of the royal
personality.

"That which a vassal can only admire!"




VIII

THE NEW PROFESSION


A knock on the door brought them both back to--the deck of the
_Mauretania_, with terra firma not so far distant below!

"There he is now," she whispered nervously. "Who shall I say you are?
And what?"

"Oh, any old thing--Warren, Mr. Warren. Leave the classification to me.
Self-identification is an American trait!"

She crossed the cabin, and after a timid pause opened the door.

"Come in," she murmured.

"Ah, I'm intruding," exclaimed Carlos, Duke of Alva, with an intonation
which expressed an invitation for Warren Jarvis to make a graceful
exit.

"Not at all," blankly observed Jarvis. "I've just been discussing my
professional task at the castle; as a member of the family you can give
me some good working material."

"I don't understand," spluttered Carlos, taken aback.

"Pardon me, cousin. This is Mr. Warren, of America, who has consented
to help me. My cousin, the Duke of Alva." She walked behind the two
men, comparing them keenly: the deadly parallel column was not at all
unfavorable to the insouciant Kentuckian.

"Glad to know you," volunteered Jarvis. "Have a cigarette?"

"I never smoke in the presence of ladies," retorted the Duke. Then with
a patronizing air he added: "I am honored to meet you, sir, if you are
in my royal cousin's employ. So, you are interested in the castle?"

"Oh, not so much in the castle as in the ghost. I'll attend to him."

"And is that your regular profession?"

"You are a good guesser, my dear Duke. That is my business--solving
mysteries--locking up family skeletons--chasing spooks and putting salt
on their tails. We have a professional name for it in the United
States."

"And what is that, sir?" asked Carlos, uncertain whether to be
affronted or to draw out this strange bird to a confidence. A quick
glance at his cousin's immobile face gave him no hint.

Jarvis continued amiably.

"We are living in an age of specialists. You have doubtless heard of
Farley the Strike Breaker, of Roosevelt the Trust Breaker. I forgot to
bring my business cards with me; but if I may be so immodest as to tell
the truth, I am known from Bowling Green to the Golden Gate as Warren
the Ghost Breaker!"

[Illustration: "_I am known from Bowling Green to the Golden Gate, as
Warren the Ghost Breaker_"]

This astounding news fairly took the Duke off his feet. He mentally
clawed the air for his equilibrium.

"_Madre de Dios!_" ejaculated the Duke, dropping his sword-cane. As he
recovered from his astonishment, the Princess interceded: "I am so glad
you came. I promised the Ghost Breaker that you would join us shortly.
You will be able to tell him, so much better than I, of all the strange
circumstances. I have only given him a rough outline of what happened
up to the time I left my brother on his way to the castle."

Carlos sank into a chair, irritated at the American's disinterested
lack of courtesy: Jarvis had not even risen from his seat on the trunk.
Somehow or other Carlos despised that trunk!

"I will be delighted to throw any possible light on the mystery of the
castle. But first let us leave your brother in peace, to let me know
why you came to America?"

Maria Theresa drew the locket from her reticule.

"This is what brought me."

"May I see it?" and the Duke held out his hand, ingratiatingly. "What a
charming old antique!"

"No, Carlos. Rather you may see the locket, but not the memorandum in
the back."

The Duke registered an expression of polite surprise.

"Memorandum?"

"Yes," and the Princess removed a small bit of paper from the ivory
back, swinging it forward to her cousin's hand, on the long silver
chain. The nobleman's dark face assumed a ruddier hue, as he caught the
trinket in fingers which Jarvis noticed were trembling in tell-tale
manner. Jarvis watched the two of them in silence.

"It's a curious old piece of work. And you came all the way to New York
to get it?"

"Yes."

"You were fortunate to find it so soon."

"I knew where to find it, Carlos; yet I was almost too late. Think of
it, after that dear old family heirloom had lain in an antique shop for
nearly ten years--suddenly there came two inquiries for it in a day,
two beside my own. The first was from a distinguished-looking gentleman
who had called early in the morning, describing it roughly to the old
man, urging him to hunt for it. It took an hour to find it--and I
happened to come in at the end of the hour. I doubled the offer of a
museum collector, and trebled that of the distinguished-looking
gentleman. I secured it."

Here, the Princess shot a sharp look into the half-closed eyes of the
Duke.

"Who do you suppose could have wanted that locket but myself, Carlos?"

"I suppose," and it was the assumed indifference of a cornered schemer,
"it has already occurred to you that I am the 'distinguished-looking
gentleman.' Has it, cousin?"

The girl's curiosity piqued her.

"But how did you learn about the memorandum, Carlos?"

"I didn't, cousin. I had not the slightest suspicion that the locket
contained an important secret; I doubt it now. I was merely following
my pet hobby, in addition to a little family sentiment. I wanted to
recover some of those precious heirlooms which had been scattered to
the four winds."

"When did you know that this one had been scattered to New York,--on
your last visit to the boulevards of Paris?" And Jarvis' smile was as
ingenuous as that of a babe of two.

The Duke of Alva scowled. There seemed something uncanny in the
sharpness of this American; but he prided himself upon the power of
diplomacy.

"I have seldom been in Paris: they are not so much interested in
antiques as in very lively moderns, Mr. Ghost Breaker!... But there,
you interrupted my thought! You would be surprised to see the
collection which I have already rescued, and which, Maria, will some
day be yours. You Americans are not noted as really astute collectors,
Mr. Jarvis."

"Well, our collectors who don't worry over millions are frequently
stung by clever counterfeits. But we laboring men, who must devote all
our time to our work, are usually able to tell imitations from the real
thing. We are not impressed by 'four-flushing,' your Excellency!"

The Duke scowled at Warren, vainly attempting to divine the meaning of
the Yankee slang. But the Kentuckian was impatient: he knew that
debates were seldom as productive as labor in a workshop, when it came
down to fundamentals.

Carlos was impatiently interrupted.

"Well, so much for the treasure--let's hear about the ghost. Of course
I'm _certain_ that there's no connection between the two, in such an
aristocratic land as Spain, which scoffs at the American pursuit of the
miserable, despised dollar.... What's your private opinion of this
ghost? Is he a real, dependable, hell-bent spook, deserving all this
press stuff which has been given to him? I've had so much experience
with spirits--being a native Kentuckian--that they must be 100-proof to
interest me!... Do you really put any stock in ghosts, Duke?"

"Yes, Mr. Warren, I am convinced that there are such things. This world
is filled with evidences of the supernatural."

"Then you honestly believe this castle is haunted?"

"I know it!" And the Duke's black eyes sparkled with an intensity which
had its effect even upon the cynical Warren Jarvis.

"So you think this ghost is dangerous to encounter--that it is the
cause of the mysterious deaths and disappearances in the old castle?"

"I do, Mr. Warren!"

Jarvis whistled meditatively. The Duke looked disgusted; this was so
absolutely against all rules of his own conduct with women.

"Well, what do you know about _that_?"

Warren was again silent. The Duke was tabulating his own material and
preparing his next charge of ammunition.

"_Ghost_ is a broad term, your Excellency. There are fifty-seven
varieties of them, just like good pickles. They're equally bad for the
digestion. What is your particular conception of this particular
ghost?"

The Duke answered impatiently.

"There are certain occult forces in this world, Mr. Warren, that
science cannot classify or fathom. Some of them are at work in that
castle, manifesting their weird powers. A priest might call them demons
or fiends--a psychologist might term them, perhaps, returned
spirits.... I can't say; but I have been there, and heard their curious
warnings and manifestations. There is something definable there, in the
periphery of those ancient ruins. A malignant spiritual force lurks
within that medi√¶val stronghold. While it haunts those musty halls it
is madness for any man to expose himself there."

"You could write a good book on it, Duke," observed Jarvis
irreverently. "Have you ever seen this ghost?"

"My brother has," interrupted Maria Theresa impetuously. "Twice, to my
knowledge, before I left Seguro. So had my father and the others who
disappeared from human ken!"

"Good Lord!" and there was a touch of the mock-heroic in the
Kentuckian's voice, which escaped his companions.

"According to the family tradition," continued the Princess, "no one
has ever seen it three times, and lived to tell the story."

"How do you connect this gentlemanly spook with the treasure, your
Excellency?" burst in Jarvis, with a swift look of interrogation which
discomfited the nobleman.

"Spook? Treasure? I see no connection. What do you mean?"

"Oh, there is always money when the ghost walks," was the mysterious
reply of the American, wasted on the untheatrical Spaniards. "That is
the first premise upon which a reliable scientific Ghost Breaker begins
his task of investigation."

"I don't know what your experience may have been, Mr. Warren. You are
evidently a brave man, but you have yet to encounter a ghost like this
supernatural spirit. Things are different in the Old World!"

Warren Jarvis sniffed.

"Huh! Brave? It takes no bravery to fight a coward--that is what the
ghost is. It's a coward like every other stealthy, sneaking spirit,
afraid to show itself by daylight, in the glare of the sun. I can tell
you now that men are not half so afraid of spirits as the spirits are
afraid of men. If you face the supernatural, it is more than half
beaten to a frazzle, before the fight begins. In my professional career
I have learned that ghosts, horse thieves, and peevish wildcats can all
be tamed by the same little charm."

The Princess was mystified.

"Charm? What do you mean--a relic?"

The Duke leaned forward, his eyes sparkling with interest.

"What is it?"

"I'd hate to tell you," responded Warren Jarvis. "It's part of my
system."

And he forthwith drew out the revolver, caressing it with an
unmistakable confidence.

"I had been hoping, Mr. Warren," remarked the Duke, "that you had some
subtle method worthy of handling this problem, and justifying the
reputation for such work which you say you maintain through America.
You evidently propose to meet the forces of the supernatural with
firearms.... I may as well tell you that this specter has been shot at
before without the slightest effect."

The Kentuckian smiled gently.

"Quite likely, your Excellency. I have seen rifle-fire that had not the
slightest effect on a wildcat for the simple reason that the firing was
wilder than the cat!"

The Duke of Alva bestowed a pitying glance upon the weapon and its
owner.

"I'm sorry for you, Mr. Warren. You will find that the ghost is more
real than the treasure."

The Princess arose indignantly. She interrupted, with feminine betrayal
of her own hand.

"But the treasure is real, Carlos. Would I have crossed the ocean for
this locket unless I knew?"

Carlos looked at her sharply.

"I know I am right, now, Carlos. With the memorandum which I found
inside the old locket, anyone, a total stranger, could walk right up to
the very stone that hides it."

There was a meaning tone in Jarvis' voice, as he added: "A pretty
dangerous paper to have around--look out that somebody else doesn't get
there ahead of you."

The Duke shot back a quick answer to the message between the words:
"Yes, it is a dangerous paper--if it leads anyone into the castle."

"Well, despite the danger and the threats of--the ghost--I'd go a long
way for the fun of unraveling a good mystery with a little spice of
danger thrown in."

The Duke scowled, and then with a peculiar emphasis on his words drew a
newspaper from the breast pocket of his coat.

"You needn't have taken such a long trip, Mr. Warren. You are leaving
behind you, in New York, a very interesting and unusual mystery. The
papers are full of the story to-day.... It will interest you too,
cousin. You were stopping at the Manhattan Hotel last night, I
believe?"

"Yes," said the girl indifferently; but she and Jarvis exchanged
eloquent glances.

The Duke was reading with unusual interest, it seemed to Jarvis.

"Why, no..." he began. "I was so wrapped up in my baggage that I really
didn't have the time nor inclination to bother with the scandal of the
day. Tell us about it?"

The nobleman began to read:

"'Pistol duel in Manhattan Hotel.... Colonel James Marcum, a wealthy
and prominent Kentucky sportsman, nearly met death at an early hour
this morning in a revolver battle in his hotel room...'"

He glanced down the column and continued:

"'Even at a late hour the police had no clew to the identity of his
assailant, except the remarkable fact that the person is still hiding
somewhere in the hotel...'"

The Kentuckian interrupted:

"The villain is probably a long way from the hotel by this time if he
knows what's what!"

"But they say he couldn't have gotten out without being seen,"
continued the Duke, still studying the printed column.

"Oh, that's the theory of the reporters. They'd lose their jobs if they
ever told the real truth in a criminal case," remarked Jarvis coolly.
"Don't believe what the papers say--unless it's nice and about
yourself!"

"Well, Mr. Ghost Breaker, what is your own opinion? You are an expert
in these matters," insisted the Duke. "This affair interests me."

Jarvis was more than nonchalant.

"He might have escaped in a thousand ways. But such work is not in my
line: that's 'gum-shoe' stuff--for plain common or garden detectives."

Nita entered the cabin, and Maria Theresa arose uncertainly.

"I'll call you when I need you, Nita." There was some hidden portent in
her tone which Jarvis failed to divine. He decided that discretion was
the better part of valor. He rose, and walked toward the door to the
promenade deck.

"We are keeping you from getting settled, I fear," he declared. "So, if
you'll excuse me at this time, I'll hope to see you at luncheon.... And
as for you, Duke, it's a great pleasure to meet your Excellency."

Carlos bowed with military grace.

"Thank you, Mr. Warren. I find you most interesting. I shall be glad to
hear more of your remarkable profession. Good-morning, sir."

The Kentuckian turned away.

As Warren reached the deck door there was a knock upon the portal to
the cabin passage.

Nita followed him, and then turned to open the second entrance. Two
pompous, red-cheeked, red-necked individuals stepped forward, without
so much as a "by-your-leave!"

The first one spoke, reading from a smudgy memorandum book.

"You are Miss M. T. Ar-r-ragan?"

The Princess acquiesced.

"You was at the Hotel Manhattan last night?"

"Yes."

"The lock on your bedroom door was broken?"

"Yes?"

The speaker jerked back the left lapel of his coat, displaying a silver
badge with great satisfaction.

"I am from headquarters, madame, and I have orders to clear up one or
two little matters connected with that affair at the hotel last night."

The speaker glared at them suspiciously.

The chivalry of Spain asserted itself. The Duke stepped forward with
spirit, gripping the cane as though it were a cavalry saber.

"Orders--orders--what orders? To break into this lady's private cabin?
What headquarters?"

"It seems to me, bo, that you're in a lady's private cabin yourself.
I'm from police headquarters, bo!"

"Do you know whom you are addressing, fellow?"

"Say, nix on this _fellow_ stuff. That'll be about all from you."

Maria Theresa interceded with her winsome grace and irresistible smile.

"Yes, Carlos, let me attend to the matter. Won't you come into the
cabin, gentlemen, and be seated?"

The two detectives beamed, their bosoms heaved with pride at this
unexpected recognition of their importance. They entered, waving away
the steward and closing the cabin door behind them.

"We're just been discussing that mystery, Inspector!" observed Jarvis,
coming nearer and taking his seat upon the trunk once more. This
irritated the Duke, who added: "You are, I take it, one of the 'gum
shoes'?"

Jarvis turned toward Maria Theresa, disregarding all properties due to
the presence of the aristocracy, and yielded to that nervous twitching
of the left eye which expresses such manifold meaning with such minimum
of sound!

The detective whirled about, from his scrutiny of the cabin, walking
toward the Duke. He fairly howled in the surprised nobleman's face:

"Gum shoe! Say, are you trying to kid me?"

The Duke replied with asperity:

"Well, sir. You are speaking rather loudly. I presume that I have
offended you?"

"You presume! I should say you do. That's a hot one. Who are you,
anyway?"

"I am Carlos, Hernando y Calderos, Duke of Alva. I have other titles,
but they would hardly interest you."

The detective glared at him malevolently, mimicking the crisp
enunciation of the nobleman.

"But you interest me, sweetie. Dook of Alver--and then some, eh? Ain't
that just too cutey-cutey for any use? Say, I'm used to these dooks and
counts--I've been around Peacock Alley at the Waldorf too long not to
know 'em by their checkered pants and them canes! Say, Dook! If you was
the Archbishop of Canterbury I'd run yer in and take yer ashore, if yer
give me any more of yer lip."

Jarvis, bumping his heels against the trunk, smiled with diabolical
enjoyment in the face of his Excellency!




IX

CHECKMATE THE FIRST


The detective glared at the nobleman, with fingers obviously itching
for action. He sucked his teeth contemptuously, and then turned his
back squarely upon the noble countenance. Over his face spread the
beatific smile which strong, rough men deem overpowering with a member
of the weaker sex.

"As you was saying, lady, before we was so impolitely interrupted, you
was in the hotel when this gunplay went on. Did you hear it?"

"Yes, sir, I heard two shots."

"Did you hear anything else?"

"Yes, indeed. I heard a great many people running up and down the
corridor, outside my door."

The detective scribbled away in his notebook. Jarvis winked again at
the Princess, over the doughty shoulders which were backed toward him.
The Duke caught the wink, and pondered over it.

"Did anyone come in your room, miss?"

"Yes. My maid was frightened, poor child. She came in, and begged me to
protect her."

"Ah-ha! A-hum! And how did your lock get broken?"

"It was broken when we came to the room. I was foolish not to complain
to the management at once, for I might have been robbed by some
sneak-thief. I explained all that at the hotel."

"Um ... All right. What about the colored man who came to your room
afterwards and carried away a large bundle?"

The Duke's eyes were sparkling now. He was biding his chance to
intervene. Jarvis watched him without the flicker of an eyelash.

"That was my servant," explained the Princess, easily. "I sent for him,
because I had made a number of purchases too late to get them into my
trunk. They are here unopened; you may examine them if you wish."

The detective waved aside the offer: he was nothing if not gallant--if
the questioned one were fair enough!

"Oh, that's all right. But what do you know about this, miss?"

He produced a pocket-knife, and walked toward her slowly, examining it
with care. The Duke of Alva leaned over his shoulder with absorbed
interest.

"This knife has the initial '_W_.' How about it?"

The girl reached forward, with a graceful hand.

"Oh, I'm so glad you found it! Thank you for bringing it to me."

"Then it's yours? Who is this party '_W_'? Your name is Aragon, I
believe."

The Princess laughed.

"I am Maria Theresa of Aragon, you see."

"I don't see. Where does the '_W_' come in? I know how to spell, you
know, even if I'm only a bull." And he glared pugnaciously at the duke.

"Why ... it isn't '_W_'--can't you understand? You're holding it upside
down. It is '_M_'--standing for my first name: Maria Theresa."

The detective grudgingly handed her the trinket. He looked into his
memorandum book again, chewing the end of his pencil.

"Now, there's just one more thing, Miss..."

Carlos could control himself no longer. He caught the officer's arm in
a feverish grip, which was as promptly thrown off.

"You will pardon me, but I wish to inform you that this man's name is
Warren..." he began.

The detective spun about, and protruded his heavy chin at the Duke.

"Say, who's running this 'Third Degree'--you or me?"

The Duke tried to temporize.

"But, my dear man..."

"Say, cull, I ain't your dear man. Cut that guff--don't dearie me. I'm
a big rough fellow, but I've got some gumption. You get out of here."

He gave him a thoroughly plebeian push toward the door.

"Yes, Carlos, do go. Leave us to attend to this matter. These gentlemen
are so kind and so sympathetic. I am sure we can finish this better
without you."

"I merely wished to point out..."

"You point _him_ out, Jim," ordered the first detective to his
assistant. "You hear what the lady says. This is her cabin."

The second official caught the aristocrat with a rude grasp of the
velvet coat-collar and shook him as one would a child. The Duke's teeth
chattered.

"Out yer goes, and if yer butts in again I'll fan yer. Beat it! Do yer
hear? Do yer get me? Skibooch!"

The Duke tried to regain his equilibrium before braving the publicity
of the saloon. His voice trembled with passion, as he retorted: "An
infernal outrage! I'll report this to his Majesty, the King."

The first detective looked at the jocular Warren Jarvis, who published
his third wink, this time in the direction of the big sleuth.

"King! Huh! Roosevelt wasn't elected! Did yer get that, Jim? Well, what
do you know about that?"

Jarvis leaned forward, with a sibilant whisper of secrecy:

"Sssh! Gentlemen. Don't be disturbed. He is quite harmless. You heard
him raving about a king? He suffers from pernicious megalomania. That's
all--nothing more. He has grandiose ideas."

Jim coughed apologetically as his superior officer blinked.

"What does them words mean, Jim?"

"Wheels--bats in his belfry--just plain nutty, Mike."

"You mean he is crazy, mister?"

Jarvis nodded.

"Yes, he is at times. But don't be cross with him, for he has a
beautiful nature, except when the ravages of the disease are upon him.
You know, he doesn't even like _me_ when he has a spell like this. But
he's not at all dangerous. It is just necessary to humor him--he's not
to blame--it's the way he was raised."

"Then you're looking out for him?" and the detective looked furtively
toward the door, as he reassured himself by fumbling with the revolver
in his own hip-pocket.

"Yes, that's my job."

The big sleuth shook his head sadly.

"I'm sorry I had to be rough with him, like that, miss. But you seen as
well as I did that he was gumming the game. Why, with some boob
detectives that I know, a feller like that might queer the crowd of
you--making it look as though you was implicated." He looked into the
ubiquitous notebook. "One question more. How do you account for the
blood on the knob of the door--from the _inside_, too?"

The girl was honestly surprised this time.

"Blood on my door? Why--I----?

"I can explain that, Inspector."

"Go ahead, then, Doctor."

"Do you mind?" and the Kentuckian turned politely toward the girl. She
shook her head, wondering what could be in his mind.

"You see, that colored man--the one you were talking about--brought the
bundle there. He tied it up and, cutting the string carelessly, broke
the blade of the knife and cut his hand. That was it, wasn't it? You
see the long blade snapped off near the handle."

The detective nodded--not completely convinced.

"Where is this colored man now?" was his question.

It seemed to Maria Theresa that they were getting hopelessly into the
toils. She was discouraged, as she glanced at the imperturbable Jarvis.
He nodded ever so slightly, and she caught her cue.

"He is in stateroom 729," she said.

"All right. I'll look at him. 729? Thanks, miss. You know, this ain't
personal at all. I'm just taking the chief's orders. I'm sorry to
bother you."

He walked toward the door with the dignified flat-footed gait which
distinguishes the Manhattan sleuth and all others in the world.

"Good-by, miss. Watch that maniac, do! He looks like a bad actor to
me."

They were gone, and Maria Theresa sank into a chair weakly. Jarvis
energetically sprang to the telephone.

"Hello! Give me room 729."

After a pause he continued: "Hello, hello, hello, Rusty! Yes, Rusty.
Damn it all, answer me, do you hear me?"

There was another pause, and the girl began to lose her control again.

"Yes, I know I told you to keep mum, but I'm telling you to talk now."
Jarvis knew that every second was precious. "Do just what I tell you
and do it quick. Take your knife and cut your left hand.... What?...
No, don't cut it off, you damn fool. Just enough to make it bleed a
little, and then tie it up with a handkerchief.... Never mind ...
That's none of your business! Remember don't answer questions! You're
deaf and dumb again."

He hung up the receiver and turned toward the Princess with a newborn
laugh.

"By George, blood will tell! You're game. You certainly handled the
detective with European statecraft. Then your cousin Carlos broke in at
the psychological moment to scatter their gum-shoe wits. It was
beautiful comedy."

"Now they believe him crazy!" she answered. "How will that turn out?"

"Nothing could be better. They won't believe a word he says. He'll be
crazy before he gets through with it. Could you handle him all right
now?"

She nodded abstractedly. She was looking at his hand, which had gone
without attention all this time, and which had been adroitly snuggled
inside his pocket during the visit of the New York detectives.

"Yes. You must hurry and have your hand dressed before it develops into
something serious."

"All right. The ship's surgeon will dress it, with collodion so that
you can't even see that it's hurt.... Crazy! Hum! That's funny!" And he
left by the door to the promenade deck, with a merry laugh which showed
how the nervous strain had lightened, after all these solitary, bitter
hours.

There was a knocking on the entry from the saloon, and at her word it
opened. The Duke entered, glaring savagely.

"Well!"

"Well!"

"Well--I'm waiting!" he exclaimed.

"Waiting for what, Carlos?"

"For some explanation of all this deceit. Who is this man Warren? Alone
with you here in your cabin!"

She raised her eyebrows in beautiful surprise, as she asked:

"Must I tell you all over again? He is a professional ghost breaker,
just as he said."

"How did you find such a creature?"

"I met him quite by accident. I knew at once that he was a man in a
thousand."

"What do you know about him, Maria?"

"Why ... that he is as well known in America as you are in Spain."

The Duke sniffed.

"Indeed! Well, he will be better known when I turn him over to the
police. He will get much of that free advertising which Americans love
so well."

"Why, Carlos, what do you mean?"

"I think you know what I mean," and there was a threat in his manner.
Just then the large detective thrust his red face into the door.

"It's all right, miss. We're going ashore now in the pilot boat. But
you should have told us that your nigger was a dummy!"

Here was the last chance for the Duke. He grasped it, hurrying toward
the door.

"One moment, gentlemen, one moment!" and he laughed in Maria's face,
confident of his success. "If this person is famous, these gentlemen
should know him.... Do you know Warren, the Ghost Breaker?"

"The what?" asked the detective.

"The Ghost Breaker!"

Both men now entered the room, grinning at each other.

"He's off his trolleys again, Jim," said the big fellow to the other.

Jarvis stepped in through the deck door.

"Is this man Warren, the famous Ghost Breaker? This man right here!"

"The guy's dippy all right, cull," remarked the nearest sleuth to
Jarvis, who nodded most seriously.

"Agree with anything he says. You know!" he muttered.

The Duke was beside himself with rage.

"Answer my question! Is this man Warren the Ghost Breaker?"

"Aw, Dook, old top, that's all right. Don't worry about it!... Sure
he's a ghost breaker, ain't he, Jim?"

"Best bet you know," replied obliging Jim. "He's the prince of all
ghost breakers!"

The Duke smote his breast furiously, while the detectives smiled
sympathetically into Jarvis' serious face.

"_Sacristi!_ Am I Carlos Hernando, Duke of Alva, to be mocked at by two
grinning bull-necked scullions?"

"Whatever you say goes, Dook!" amiably replied the first detective.

A ship's officer appeared on the promenade deck and called through the
open door at them.

"Hurry up, if you're going ashore with the pilot, officers."

The two men bowed with their best imitation of gallantry, to the
Princess Maria Theresa of Aragon. Nita, standing in the vestibule, sent
a melting glance at the faithful Jim, who stumbled over the treacherous
cabin threshold.

The superior of the two shook hands pompously with Jarvis, whose left
hand was still in his pocket.

"Be kind to the little rascal, Doc. He might not get such good
treatment from them Scotland Yard bulls, on the other side. They don't
understand human nature like us fellers--they ain't got no education
over there. Good-by, Doc! Don't let your foot slip!"

He turned toward the Duke, as he passed through the door.

"You're all right, Dook, old boy, if you do have fits! Ghost
Breaker--ha, ha!"

Carlos started toward the other door, with a bound.

"It's not too late. I'll see the captain."

Jarvis, sitting on the trunk, whistled with typical American lack of
reverence. As the nobleman turned about, he found himself looking into
the barrel of the revolver. A quizzical smile played about the firm
lines of the Kentuckian's mouth.

"Don't be in too big a hurry, your Excellency. The captain is apt to be
busy just now. And besides, he may not believe in ghosts!"




X

A WAGER WITH THE DUKE


What a curious sea voyage!

The Duke's attempt to warn the captain of the nature of this one
particular passenger never eventualized. When the _Mauretania_ had
finally left behind all sight of America, Jarvis relaxed his severity.

"You may enjoy yourself, Excellency," he said, as he put away the
revolver. "But I would like to speak to you alone. As the
representative of the Princess, on a most important mission, I am
compelled to look after her interests in a definite manner."

He faced the girl meaningly.

"Will you excuse us for a moment's interchange of pleasantries?"

She nodded, and retired to her bedroom with Nita.

"What do you want, you scoundrel? I know that you are an impostor--a
make-believe, and worse!"

"Take it easy, Duke. I'm really not too enthusiastic over you. But this
Colt revolver is not a make-believe. I am only going to bother your
aristocratic memory with this one little idea--that if there is any
reporting to the captain or ship's officers, to interfere with my
services as Ghost Breaker for the royal house of Aragon, there is going
to be a nice band concert in the public square of your native town--and
the special number on the programme will be the 'Dead March from Saul,'
with pretty black cr√™pe on the ducal doorknob! Do you catch my
meaning?"

"You Yankee pig!"

"I'm not a Yankee--I'm a Johnny Reb, by birth and education. But both
Yankees and Rebels acquired a reputation for marksmanship about fifty
years ago." The jest died out of his voice. "One whimper from you, damn
you, and I'll shoot you as I would a mad dog!"

There was such a savage rasp in that mellow Southern voice that the
Duke instinctively dodged backward, as though expecting the first
volley.

"We shall see what we shall see!" were his final words. "And if I see
you about the cabin of my cousin again,--well, perhaps the officers of
this ship may take a hand."

Warren pursed his lips into an ironical grin.

"You know, a member of my profession doesn't take a solemn oath to wait
until the remains are resting in pieces: it might not be a difficult
task to take up an avocation as well as a vocation. I wonder if I
couldn't be a pretty good Ghost Maker? Think it over."

Jarvis, with a simple word of good-bye to the Princess, returned to his
own cabin, where he lost himself in slumber. The tortures of his trunk
trip were still with him, in aching muscles and strained ligaments.

The girl wondered what had become of him, for it was not until late in
the evening that he telephoned to her at the suite.

She was on the deck, listening to the orchestra concert. Nita responded
at the 'phone. Jarvis surprised the girl by a voluble discourse in
Spanish. He had mastered it in his tropical travels. It was to come in
as a life-saving accomplishment before the end of the adventure.

"Tell me, Nita. Have you good eyes?" he curiously inquired.

"Ah, se√±or, so I am told," was the ingenuous reply.

"Well, in that sense I have my doubts about their goodness ... but what
I want you to do, for the sake of your Princess and her brother, is to
keep those black eyes eternally watchful. I am expecting some curious
tricks from one we know. Let her know what you see--and she will tell
me. Remember--keep looking, listening all the time."

Nita promised, and Warren repaired to the lounge, where he observed the
Duke nursing his ill-humor over a lonesome absinthe _frapp√©_.

Warren did not seek companionship either, upon this journey. He knew
too many men in the ranks of the international traders, to dare risk
recognition. The great roadway between New York and the European ports
has now become a veritable promenade, thronged with travelers: it is no
longer a lonely passage.

The great steamship was crowded on this trip, Rusty being in good luck
to obtain a stateroom relinquished just before sailing time. With
nearly two thousand people on board, it was a floating town--and more
than once in the crowded decks and saloons he caught glimpses of men he
knew in club, college, or business. He would invariably beat a
precipitate retreat. His daily procedure was hermit-like. With the
exception of an early morning stroll, alone, on the promenade deck, he
took no more chances after that first morning. His meals were served in
his stateroom. From the splendid library of the ship he secured ample
reading material to while away the time.

At night he spent an hour in walking with the Princess--and they were
wonderful moments. Each evening he seemed to grow better acquainted
with this unusual woman--finding beneath the surface of courtly reserve
a depth of feeling, a breadth of humanity which would hardly have been
believable from her calm, almost indifferent manner.

Her education in an English school had internationalized her--her wide
knowledge of books, in all the literatures of Europe, her familiarity
with the best of art, poetry, the drama and music--had made of her a
delightful, ever surprising traveling companion.

The girl was interested in everything American. She plied him with
questions about the city, the country, the customs. Her brief stay in
New York had been all too limited--her curiosity was only whetted by
the brief survey of externals which is all that a stranger may get,
without the guidance of an initiate.

To her, America represented a great new universe, teeming with
vitality. Compared with the medi√¶valism of her own country, the
modernity of the States was a wonderful poetic drama of ideals,
accomplishment, and goals worth while.

"What do you think of titles, Mr. Jarvis?" asked the girl, one evening.
"When you made your recessional into the Middle Ages by taking the
feudal oath to me, you were flippant, almost sarcastic: yet by my
standards, I could not feel that any man could defend my interests with
propriety unless he were of my own people--so, you were adopted with
more seriousness than you supposed."

Jarvis flicked a cigarette into the swirling waters far beneath them,
as he answered.

"Titles do not appeal to Americans, as a general thing. To the simpler
folk, they represent the yoke of the ancient Lion whose mane was
cropped in 1776. To the broader folk, they are no more than the marks
of family: although I must confess that your worthy cousin would create
much fluttering of hearts and waving of ivory fans around Newport and
Lennox,--where American hearts, of a sort, and American fortunes of
questionable worth are bartered for a tin-plated coronet. But that's
the revenge of the Great God of Misfits."

He turned toward her, resting his hand upon the rail.

"You are no different physically, mentally, socially from many of the
Southern, Northern, and Western girls I have met in my own country. You
are dependent upon the fashions, to bring your charms to the utmost
effectiveness." The Princess blushed in the dark. "But, differing from
many of them, you do succeed!" he added.

"You are just as human as the fine girls I have met back home--your
titled classes correspond with the fine old families of the United
States--and we have the advantage over you that by our own endeavor we
can change the titles, by our own efforts, without waiting for the
death of our loved ones."

His mind turned to his own mother, to whom his successes had been a
source of increasing happiness.

"I was only a little knight back home in Kentucky--when I was a tiny
chap. As I went into the world, and fought the battles, and won some
(after losing more), to my dad and the mother I became a prince.... And
the great thing about being a prince--to your family--in a republic, as
compared with being a prince in a monarchy, is that a chap must keep on
making good in the job, or he'll fail of election, just in the years
when he wants it most!

"To tell you the truth, your Highness, America is crowded with 'wealthy
families,' 'socially prominent,' 'old Colonial families,' two or three
million _Mayflower_ blossoms, and similar Philistines! There are
hundreds of clever people who make good annual incomes in our country
with their ingenuity in connecting the Joneses and the Browns and the
Smiths with Richard the Lion-Heart and Bill the Conqueror, by marriage.
In my native State, Kentucky, there are enough majors, colonels, and
generals to officer the armies of Europe--and as for judges!... There
are enough badges, fraternity pins, cockades, and association medals to
keep second-hand jewelers busy for their lifetimes! My countrymen are
the most passionate collectors of heraldic certificates and
genealogical maps in the world. The instinct for decoration is
prevalent--the more obscure the family, the more plentiful the framed
diplomas of aristocratic origin on the walls!"

The Princess was unable to follow the cynicism of the speech, but a
growing admiration for Jarvis' analytical powers led her to put
confidence in his opinions.

"And what harm does it do?" he concluded. "They are titles of universal
brotherhood, and peace breeds more American colonels and majors than an
international Armageddon. And it is all in the game!"

"And then, you do not have such a disgust for titles and the marks of
good family, after all?"

She was almost eager in her inquisition of the vassal.

"Your Serene Highness has no cause for worry: although you will
doubtless never need care for any American opinion" (and Warren studied
her face, as the fine silhouette was illumined by the nearby deck
light), "for in my country a princess is recognized whether she wear
ermine robes, or a calico shirtwaist and a ragged skirt. You see,--a
republic is at least well illuminated. We're not afraid of the
light!... However, I imagine that your title will be changed before
another year, and in that case you will have no cause for curiosity!"

The girl's eyes burned as she questioned him.

"What do you mean, Mr. Jarvis? For a vassal, you are decidedly
presumptuous. You need not come to court again until you are summoned.
Good-night."

And then she turned, as Jarvis maintained a discreet silence, walking
rapidly toward the promenade door of her suite. He bade her good-night,
without response.

Jarvis remembered an old verse of the greatest balladist of the century:

    "_For Julia O'Grady and the Colonel's lady,
    Were both the same, under the skin--
    And I learned about women from 'er!_"

Maria Theresa was not in a mood to see Jarvis for two more days.
Instead of trying to win her forgiveness for a wrong--he had not
committed--he stuck the closer to his stateroom, where, with the
solicitous attention of Rusty, he lived a drone-like and peaceful
existence, poring over books. They were not fiction or philosophy--the
Kentuckian's interest was in Baedeker and other books on Spain. With
the same application which had carried him over the thin ice of college
examinations, he had grasped a valuable understanding of the customs
and peculiarities of Spain. He gave especial attention to the railroad
maps, for Warren was not trusting too implicitly to the permanent
humility of the Duke.

That worthy was passing a most disagreeable voyage.

He was naturally of an irascible, dictatorial temperament--accustomed
to flattery and adulation. On this return trip to the Continent, the
ship's list comprised Americans for the most part. They were in little
humor to cajole the swarthy, sarcastic, and unsociable Spaniard. Their
minds were too full of the pleasures of the months to come, of plans
and frolics in contemplation, to sacrifice their time to this dour
personage.

The Duke endeavored to mellow his own discomfiture at Maria Theresa's
coldness with numerous visits to the grill. The result was a morning
"grouch," an afternoon headache, and a twilight bitterness which kept
him permanently aloof from all companionship.

On two occasions he had observed Warren in earnest and apparently
friendly conversation with the captain and first officer. He was not
aware that it was intended for his own benefit--and that nothing more
intimate than the weather was under discussion. But it presaged a
prompt information to the "Ghost Breaker" in case he registered his
complaint. The Duke's methods of warfare were not of the
gallant-charge-against-intrenchments variety. He specialized in the
executive ability which directs the activities of other men; and so he
bided his time.

The fifth evening out from New York harbor--they were due some time the
following day in the Mersey, dependent largely upon the tide and
weather--he could stand no longer the evident growth of friendliness
between his cousin and her "employed" assistant.

Maria Theresa had forgiven the Kentuckian for his jest--without the
formality of an apology, because she was a woman. She had once more
yielded to her loneliness, and walked the wind-swept promenade deck to
discuss their common subjects.

As Jarvis bade her good-night and stepped into the shadow of the deck,
he observed the aristocrat knocking angrily upon the cabin door.

"Let me in, Maria," cried the Duke, in Castilian. "I must talk to you,
for your own good."

"I suppose that means my bad," muttered Jarvis. "I'll just smoke
another cigarette in the neighborhood, to see how things go."

The Duke was admitted--his conversation in the parlor of the suite
seemed to last for half an hour. At last the door opened, and he
reappeared. He was talking excitedly at the doorway.

"What I have said to you, I would say before him, were he not skulking
in his cabin, afraid of justice. He is a pig of a poltroon!" cried his
Excellency. "I wish he were here now, and I would tell it to his face."

The girl replied calmly--so quietly indeed that Jarvis could not
distinguish the words.

But he stepped forward, and laid a hand upon the nobleman's arm. Carlos
jumped nervously, as though bitten by a snake.

"Here I am, your Excellency. Let's hear what it is you have to say?"

The other swallowed his choler, speaking with difficulty.

"I ... I ... cannot speak on the deck of the ship!" he exclaimed.

"Then come into my cabin again," said the Princess with pardonable
asperity. "You may tell Mr. Jarvis your opinion of him now."

Jarvis gave the Duke an ungentle shove, with the result that the
troublesome door threshold again intercepted to demonstrate the laws of
gravity. The Duke sprawled most unromantically upon the deck inside. He
scrambled to his feet, muttering Spanish oaths.

"Dog! If you were my equal socially I would challenge you!" he
spluttered.

"If you were my equal physically I would punch your head," was the apt
reply of the American. "Now, let's hear this opinion which you were so
anxious to tell to my face."

There was a humorous twinkle in the dark eyes of the Princess, and
Warren observed, down the passageway to the private stateroom, the
smiling face of Nita, the maid.

"Well, Mr. Warren ... I ... merely ... said that I know you to be what
you Yankees call a humbug! For some purposes of your own--perhaps to
attempt a theft of this imaginary fortune, you are trying to get to
Seguro ... However," and at the quiet interest on the face of Jarvis he
was emboldened to make his statements more emphatic, "I have my doubts
about your honesty in the whole matter."

"And that means what, your Excellency?"

"I don't believe you even intend to risk the chances in Spain. You have
duped my cousin, a helpless, innocent girl--ignorant of the sharp ways
of American adventurers. You have secured a free passage on this ship,
and doubtless an advance payment, to engage you. I would wager anything
that you will never see Spain, in this case."

Jarvis smiled ingratiatingly.

"You are a clever student of character. Such men make good gamblers.
How much are you willing to wager on this little affair? How much will
you bet that I do not appear in Spain?"

The Duke of Alva bit his lip. He had lost too much in recent gamings to
afford greater risks just now. But he was a sportsman--particularly did
he wish to impress his kinswoman.

"I will wager a thousand pounds of English money,--five thousand
dollars in your American rags,--that you will not appear at Seguro in
time to help the Princess."

"That's a great deal of money, especially for a hard-working business
man like myself," answered Warren. "What are the exact stipulations of
this wager? I might borrow the money from the Princess, as an advance
payment for breaking the ghost?"

Carlos sneered exultantly.

"Yes, you might borrow it but there is not so much ready money around
Seguro. My terms, if you care to know them, are these: I wager the
thousand pounds that you will not be at Seguro three nights from
to-morrow--the time when we will arrive, according to the train
schedule. However, why should I waste talk, with a man, on a bet which
is not for tradesmen but for gentlemen?"

"Who would hold the stakes?"

The Duke smiled, and waved a gallant hand toward his cousin.

"Who better than my kinswoman, the Princess of Aragon?"

"Who better?" echoed Jarvis.

He was fumbling with his waistcoat, his back to the Princess and her
cousin. Suddenly with a jerk, he brought forth a leather money belt
which had been tightly bound about his body, diagonally over one and
under another shoulder. The Duke's eyes protruded. Jarvis dropped the
treasure "chest" upon the table, while even the Princess evidenced her
surprise. Opening the little pockets, which joined each other along its
entire length, he began to pile up gold pieces.

"I believe I have the amount handy, your Excellency!" he remarked
amiably. "May I trouble you to invite you to produce the money for your
own side of the bet? We have a vulgar custom among us in America, of
requesting the other man to either 'put up or shut up.'"

It happened that this cash had been carefully drawn from his resources
before the eventful last evening at the club. Jarvis had prepared
himself for all exigencies: he had not imagined that the first use
would be a reversal to the ancient custom of his ancestors in the Blue
Grass State,--a bet upon a race. But blood will tell, and here he was
in the time-honored custom of the family!

The Duke had not seen so much cash since his last ill-fated pilgrimage
to Monte Carlo. He was staggered. But the musical laugh of the Princess
brought back the haughty _savoir faire_ for which he was noted!

"Ah ... well ... I understand you, sir," he stammered, with improving
volubility. "Very good. As the Duke of Alva, it is not necessary for me
to produce the exact cash on the spot. The word of a Spanish nobleman
is as good as his bond. It is a wager, and the terms stand."

His black eyes studied the pile of gold coins with sparkling interest.

"Very good,--twice in the same place. The word of a Kentuckian is as
good as his bond. I agreed to let the Princess be the stakeholder--she
may hold your word, and my money-belt. Your Serene Highness--will you
do me the honor?"

And he turned toward the blushing girl, as he handed over the treasure.
The insult was not lost on the Duke. But, as Jarvis reached for his
hat, he could not resist a final slap!

"Good-night, your Highness. I advise you to be very careful with the
lock on the door. The ship lands to-morrow evening, and some villain
may break into your stateroom, rob you of the Duke's word of honor and
sell it to some enterprising Liverpool pawnbroker. Pleasant dreams! I
hope to welcome you to Seguro, your Excellency. Don't spend the five
thousand until you get there--remember, the home industries need
encouragement."

And he walked out to the promenade deck. The Duke looked at his cousin,
flushed a swarthy red at the cynical laugh on her pretty face. Then he,
too, hurried out--through the saloon passage. He was anxious to get to
his own stateroom to think things over.




XI

WHEN THE SHIP COMES IN


Back in his stateroom Warren was poring with renewed interest over the
time-tables between Liverpool, London, Paris, and Madrid. Seguro was on
the main line from the French capital to the principal one of Spain.

As he made various penciled memoranda upon a page of his leather
notebook, the telephone bell tinkled.

He answered and heard the voice of the Princess.

"Can you see me at once,--on the promenade deck, by my door?"

"Yes. Good-by."

In a few moments he was talking to her in the dark; all the lights of
her suite were out. The girl was very nervous.

"I have a paper which Nita found upon the floor--it was crumpled and
must have fallen from the pocket of my cousin when he fell. I want to
give you back that belt, Mr. Jarvis: for I have heard before of some of
the wager-debts of Carlos. It is safer with you. Let me know what you
think about this paper, and tell me to-morrow morning. We are due in
port late in the evening, you know."

"I will. There may be something in which I wish your help, as well,
your Highness. I have made up my mind to reach Seguro before the
Duke--for many reasons."

The girl caught his hand impetuously.

"You don't fear for your life before you get there, do you?" she asked
softly. "I want you to help me in my castle. That is our bargain--but I
know you better than I did when we met in New York. I don't want you to
run too big a risk for me until the great trial comes. Do be careful,
now."

A thrill sent the Kentuckian's head reeling for an instant at the
unexpected touch of those warm, electric fingers. Then he caught
himself.

"Your vassal is still ambitious for promotion. But he will not fight
the windmills of Spain on an old mule like Don Quixote. He prefers
modern methods--such as dynamite, and other pleasant little novelties."

He pressed her hand with a returning warmth, slipped the belt about
him, and started down the promenade deck again. Something prompted him
to step into the black shadow of a companionway as a figure crossed
beneath an electric overhead lamp far forward on the deck.

He waited.

The figure approached noiselessly.

It was the Duke! He was wearing slippers, with felt soles apparently,
for his steps caused no sound. Jarvis watched him with a strange
misgiving--a fear not for himself. Yet he deemed it wiser to wait for
developments.

Up and down the deck paced the nervous, noiseless figure. At last the
Duke returned and disappeared from view, through the door by which he
had entered the Kentuckian's view.

"I wonder what that meant?" thought Jarvis. "Perhaps he is having a
fight with his conscience--just as I have been doing."

And he watched the speeding waves, racing past the great vessel as it
seemed--for so steady was the swift advance of the ship that it seemed
they were on dry land, rather than the boundless expanse of the depths.

"Here I am--after all my education, all the work of years, to advance
myself, running away from my own country--an escaped gun-man, just like
an East Side thug."

In the comfortable calm of the shipboard life, with unfamiliar scenes,
away from the reminders of his tragedy at Meadow Green, it did not now
seem a fine thing that he had done.

Man is not normally a destroyer of his own kind--and his fine instincts
were asserting themselves. Yet, after all, despite his vow to his
father, this had been actual self-defense.

The other had fired the first shot: he had planned to trap him with a
decoy, and in the end it was survival of the fittest.

These thoughts had been frequently in his mind, but he had resolutely
driven them from him. Now they were nearing another port, a great
commercial cross-ways of the travel world. Here again he was coming
within the grasp of the law.

He was not too certain that all had been given up, in that questioning
pursuit of the Princess and her party. That broken door lock might yet
admit the hand of legal vengeance.

"And that Duke? He'll try to earn that five thousand dollars surely
enough now. Well, I'd better be worrying over my own future instead of
the dead past. They've said 'let the dead past bury itself, and don't
climb the graveyard fence.' That's good logic. But I'd better be
looking toward some of the fences ahead. I wonder what is on the
paper?"

He returned to his stateroom, where Rusty was dozing in a chair,
waiting for the good-night instructions.

Jarvis sat down and studied the fragment. He sat bolt upright, at first
with rage and then a growing amusement.

"Look here, Rusty. This Duke is trying to put one over on me," he
declared, waking his servant.

"Huh? What's dat, Marse Warren?" and Rusty rubbed his eyes drowsily.

"Do you see what this paper is?"

"Looks like a telegram letter, boss."

"That's a wireless blank, Rusty. It has never been sent. It is the
first draft. See--the words are crossed out here, and a sentence
changed there. The person who wrote this message tried to save money,
by cutting it down, just as we, back home, waste a dollar's worth of
time, trying to shorten a telegraph message into ten words. Isn't that
reasonable?"

"Yassir. But what does it mean? I don't read no sich langwidge."

Jarvis smiled.

"It's in Spanish. It's addressed to Scotland Yard, in London."

"What's dat? Is it some schoolhouse lot?"

"It's detective headquarters, Rusty. And it is about me."

"About you-all!" Rusty was wide awake by this time, in all truth. He
had an instinctive suspicion of anything connected with brass buttons
and detectives.

"Yes. It warns Scotland Yard that a man named Warren, on this
steamship, is wanted by the New York police, and that I should be
arrested before the passengers can leave."

"Who signed dat mizzable contraption?"

"It isn't signed, Rusty. The only person who writes Spanish and who
could be so deeply interested in my wickedness is that high and mighty
relative of the Princess. He wrote it in Spanish so the wireless
operator probably wouldn't notice or understand the message."

"Well, Marse Warren, dis is a ship--dey alluz has ropes. Can't you
climb overboard when she is hitched to de wharfboat?"

Jarvis was thinking rapidly. He looked at his watch.

"The detectives will come on with the pilot boat, Rusty, which I
understand meets the _Mauretania_ about eight or ten miles offshore.
There won't be any chance on the wharfboat. But that gives me a good
idea--however, it doesn't seem right to make the Duke of Alva waste his
hard-earned coin on wireless messages. There's no free list with
Marconi, you know."

Jarvis was walking up and down the stateroom nervously by this time.

"Rusty, in my suitcase is an old suit of clothes which I put in to use,
if I had to jump the town on account of Marcum. I thought I might go to
the mountains when I went over to the Belmont Hotel. Now, get it out,
and those old tennis shoes, and that cap."

"Whaffor, Marse Warren?" The big whites of his eyes were rolling--an
indication that Rusty Snow's mind was not as much at ease as usual.
"You ain't gonta do nothin' dangerous, is you, Marse Warren? Remember
you-all is de oney one left in de fam'ly an' you's got to look after
yohself."

Warren placed a kindly hand on the negro's shoulder.

"Rusty, I remember that once when Meadow Green got too small for you,
years ago, you started out with a minstrel show--'The Darktown
Merrymakers,' they called it."

This leap over the chasm of years was too much for Rusty.

"Yassir," he agreed, after recovering from his surprise. "But, I had to
walk back home."

"The thing I want to know, Rusty, is whether you learned how to act
when you were with that troupe. Did you?"

"Did I? Marse Warren, dere wasn't no _amotion_ dat wasn't developed in
me on dat trip--I started off laughin' and came back like a weepin'
angel."

"Ha, ha!" laughed Jarvis. "That's splendid. Now, Rusty, I want to have
you do some more play-acting--only turn it around. This time I want you
to go away weeping, and we'll come back laughing!"

Rusty was actually offended.

"Ah, Marse Warren. You's pickin' on de ole nigger. Dat was w'en I was a
young an' sassy coon. No moh actin' fer mine."

"That's just what you've got to do, Rusty. Obey orders or walk back to
New York!"

Rusty blinked and grumbled to himself. Then, as usual, he acquiesced
with that famous grin.

"Oh, Marse Warren, I'm game fer anything dat you is. What is de play?"

"I think we can call this one 'Why Dukes Leave Home,' Rusty. Now, you
get busy with those clothes, and pack up the suitcases again, so they
won't be missed. I'm going on the boat deck, over us, for a little walk
and some thinking."

Jarvis was gone for about fifteen minutes. Rusty was beginning to get
nervous by the time he had returned. His hands and face were sooty.

"Where you-all been, Marse Warren? Climbin' up on de smokestack?"

"No, just investigating things. Now, after I write this note I will
tell you about your acting and give you a rehearsal. I haven't any time
to lose, Rusty."

Warren wrote very carefully, tearing the paper up several times and
throwing the fragments through the open porthole, for this was an
outside stateroom. At last he had finished it.

He smiled over it more than once, finally sealed it, and laid it
carefully in the center of the little folding writing-desk, where it
was in plain view from the door.

Then he began to disrobe, changing to the rough old suit and the tennis
shoes. He dispensed with undergarments and hose.

"Now, Rusty, I want you to go down to the steward of the second cabin
and tell him you are very hungry. Get some good sliced meat, some
biscuits, and some fruit. Wrap it up in paper--I know it's late, but
there's always someone on watch in the pantry. A little American money
will go a long way with these British stewards. Hurry back."

As soon as Rusty was out of the room, Jarvis wrapped the money-belt
firmly about his body, under the flannel shirt. He placed some gold
coins in a handkerchief, which he tied into a knot. Then he slipped out
to the promenade deck, walking along its deserted length to the room of
the Princess. He tapped on the window of the parlor of the suite until
the door opened slightly.

Nita's frightened voice came to him. He answered reassuringly.

"It is Warren. I want to speak to the Princess."

The maid hurried back, and brought her mistress. Warren spoke to her in
a whisper.

"I understand the treachery," he said. "Have no fear. I will meet you
at Seguro when you arrive. Be surprised at nothing--and take care of
Rusty, if he needs it. I intend winning that five thousand dollars even
if the Duke's note goes to protest! Good-by!"

She felt his warm, strong hand clasping hers. A great dread came over
her--an unusual sensation it was. Yet she said nothing, for some
strange reason inexplicable to herself.

She passed a sleepless night.

Next morning the news spread over the ship like wildfire that a first
cabin passenger was missing!

All his belongings were in order; his clothes hung up carefully in the
wardrobe, just as he had undressed, assisted by his faithful valet.

And that poor unfortunate--how he sobbed and beat his portly bosom over
the grief which was racking the loyal African heart. The Duke of Alva
went to the captain to inquire about the terrible affair.

"Yes, sir. He is gone. A pleasant, courteous fellow, too. Always minded
his own business, never complained. It's too bad. Too bad. And that
letter he left--it nearly broke my heart--and I'm a gruff old sea-dog,
and have seen many a tragedy in my years as a master!"

The captain wiped his eye with the back of his hand.

The Duke fingered his cane nervously.

"But the note, sir. What did that say? As the cousin of her exalted
Highness, Princess Maria Theresa of Aragon, I insist on knowing about
this strange person. He was in my cousin's employ. She is entitled to
know what sort of a person he was."

The captain glared angrily at the Duke.

"I am the commander of this vessel, sir. On the high sea, I am in
supreme control, and know how to run the _Mauretania_ without advice
from a bloody Spanish popinjay! I will turn that letter over to the
authorities when we land." The captain spluttered indignantly.

"They will meet the boat as the pilot comes on board. I sent them a
wireless!" cried the Duke.

"How dare you go over my head, in any matter of discipline on this
vessel?" cried the raging commander. "What do you mean by such a thing?
I am the one to warn."

The Duke was embarrassed, for he felt the helplessness of his position
before this legalized tyrant of the deep.

"I've a mind to think all was not well with this unfortunate young man,
from the tone of his letter before he jumped overboard. Not a thing was
missing from his wardrobe, but the pajamas he wore--when he ran out on
the deck. At least, we find no clothes missing! I'll have something to
say to Scotland Yard myself!"

"But the man threatened to shoot me if I spoke to you or any of the
officers about him. Now that he is dead I don't fear him."

"Huh!" snorted the captain. "You look about the type of man who
wouldn't fear the dead. But what about ghosts, young man! What about
_ghosts_? Did you stop to think of ghosts after people are dead?"

This perfectly innocent question of the seafaring, superstitious mind
had a curious effect upon the nobleman.

"_Carramba!_" he muttered between his teeth, and turned away with a
white face. "I wonder what could have been in that letter?"

And the captain glowered at him as he walked nervously down the
companionway to his lonely stateroom, to brood in a state of miserable
apprehension.

Toward dinner-time the pilot boat was sighted. Several men clambered on
board, as well as that official. They sought the captain, and then
visited the Princess. Carlos took good care to be in her suite when
they came.

Rusty, weeping as though his heart were broken, detailed the sad
conversation which he had held the preceding night with his unfortunate
employer.

"Poh Marse Warren! Ah'll nebber see 'im again--until de time for de
ghost!"

At this speech Maria Theresa observed a nervous twitching about the
mouth of her noble kinsman.

Then Rusty became so incoherent in his sorrow that they could get no
satisfaction out of him. They studied the circumstances of the case and
made their notes, with frequent whispered conferences. Next to Rusty,
the Duke was the most unhappy person present, although the Princess
showed the strain of her uneasiness.

After the men completed the first quizzing, they repaired once more to
Warren's stateroom to seek for other papers.

When they had been gone a minute or so, Carlos waved Nita out of the
room. That young person could look otherwise than melting with her
black eyes when occasion demanded. This glance was of the sparkling
kind which would kill!

"Tell me, my dear Maria Theresa," began Carlos, after some stammering,
"did you inform the detectives about the money-belt which he gave to
you?"

"Naturally not. That was his affair, and the property passed out of his
possession when I became stakeholder, according to the laws of wagers,
did it not?"

"Ah, yes. You are a brilliant girl. And a logical one, too. Well, give
it to me, then, as the affair is settled. I have several debts which I
would like to pay as we pass through London."

The Princess' eyes blazed but her voice was smooth.

"So, my cousin, you claim your wager thus promptly. Are you aware that
it would look bad for you if the detectives knew you had bet this
enormous sum--and now were the gainer because of his disappearance?
Tell me, Carlos, do you know any more than the rest of us about the
Ghost Breaker?"

The man rose to his feet, his knees wavering, and then with a supreme
effort he steadied himself against the back of the chair. His eyes were
distended and the handsome mouth sagging.

"_Madre de Dios!_" he cried appealingly--all nonchalance and scorn now
missing from his mien, "You don't mean to say that _you_--my blood
relative--the woman I adore, could _believe such a thing_?"

The girl looked away. He could not see the ironical smile on the
scarlet lips.

"Carlos, I have said no such thing. But wouldn't it be better to wait
until we reach Seguro--as a matter of sportsmanship? Our family has had
the reputation of being honorable, even in games and wagers. I am
nervous, Carlos. This has upset me more than you can believe. I will
never mention the wager again, until you bring up the subject."

And she retired to her stateroom, where Nita dressed the soft dark hair
with her accustomed skill--and a smile concealed with difficulty.

The search was ended. The Scotland Yard men scoured all the cabins,
from steerage up; they even quizzed the engineers, the stokers, the
cooks, the multitude of men and passengers. No clew could alter the sad
deduction which they had drawn.

"Well, Captain," said the detective in charge of the case, "it's a sad
affair. But he's better off. We'll take this letter to headquarters,
sir, with your written report of the circumstances. What will be done
about the negro servant?"

The captain shook his head.

"Poor fellow, he is heartbroken. The Princess has very kindly offered
to take him into her service. The letter asked that all the baggage,
clothes, and personal property in the stateroom be given as a farewell
gift to the faithful fellow. If you have no objection I will let him
take the luggage along, when he leaves the ship with the party of her
Highness."

And that is how it was, that evening, that out through the dismal
drizzle of an interminably long day Rusty Snow marched down the dock,
carrying Warren Jarvis' luggage and two satchels of the Princess of
Aragon--another loyal retainer in her service.

It was a curious ending to an unusual voyage.

And Carlos, Duke of Alva, breathed a sigh of relief as he passed the
last dock policeman, to assist his cousin into a waiting taxicab. They
were to take the night train for London.




XII

WELCOME TO SEGURO!


The Princess and her party were delayed in Liverpool by the queries of
the authorities just long enough to make them miss connections with the
boat train at London. The trip had been carefully planned; this one
provoking delay cost them another close connection at the station in
Paris.

"Confound it," declared the Duke of Alva; "after all this long trip it
seems to take us longer still to get back to Seguro. Maledictions on
that miserable American pig. He brought bad luck from start to finish."

His cousin's face had not its usual color, but now a rosy tint flushed
up for a moment as she answered sharply.

"I will not permit you to speak so of the man who at least volunteered
to risk his life for me and for my brother. He proved himself more the
gentleman, Carlos, than you--with all the boasted advantage which we
believe accompanies a title."

The Duke was silent, morose and uncertain himself, for the remainder of
the tiresome ride.

Rusty was humble as ever, but there was an expectant look in his rotund
face. He inquired many times as to the exact time for the arrival of
the train at San Fernandez, the nearest railroad station to Seguro.

From here the party would travel by motor to the old estate of the
Princess and her family. It was a twenty-five-mile ride. The country
through which the train was passing grew rougher with every mile.

After irritating delays and interminable waits at stations--for train
service in Spain is the worst in Europe--San Fernandez was reached.
Here they were compelled to wait in the semi-modern hotel until an
automobile could be obtained. The long ride was begun, over rough
roads, no roads at all, and through mud-holes which seemed relics of
the Flood.

"This makes me think of de Arkansaw Traveler," muttered Rusty, but his
reminiscence was unappreciated by his tired companions.

A blow-out, delay with the mending of the tire, and the fall of
darkness wore out what spirits were left among the four voyagers. At
last the little town was reached, and the machine was compelled to stop
on the outskirts of the village, by the old post-road house, where a
sleepy soldier was guarding the road for some government purposes.

As the lights of the car threw their garish glare upon the portico of
the dilapidated structure, a man in English clothes, carrying a small
satchel, stepped out and ran down toward the machine.

"Hoopey!" howled Rusty Snow, with such sudden gusto as to frighten his
companions. The Duke stood up, trembling: he could not believe his
eyes. Even Nita drew back with a scream of horror, which turned into
dumfounded happiness as the unmistakable features of Warren Jarvis
appeared in the bright glow.

"The Ghost Breaker!" exclaimed the Duke.

The Princess merely held out her hands, with a happy warmth which
Jarvis could feel through her gloves.

"How did you spring out of the earth, just here?" she cried.

"Well, I got to the town a bit late. The old carry-all that brought me
broke down three miles back and I stumbled along, knowing this was the
only road which could bring you. I stopped here for something to
eat--and the place is so old that not even the townspeople come there
any more.... The food was older than the town."

He tossed his grip to Rusty, and turned toward the Duke.

"It strikes me that I won my bet, your Excellency!"

"Where did you come from? We thought you were drowned at sea."

"I _was_ nearly drowned when I slid down a rope, outside the ship and
flopped into the harbor as she lay at the dock. After hiding under the
cover of a lifeboat for twelve hours, I was so stiff that my
quarter-mile swim was the hardest job I ever did. On shore I bought new
clothes, and took the first train. Q.E.D."

"How did you get here ahead of us?" asked the Princess, still
misbelieving her senses. "I knew you would make it--but how so fast?"

"I had a good day's start of you--even without this automobile. But
let's get on up to that castle of yours, for I want to finish up my job
and get back to America."

The Duke had been watching the expression of the American, trying in
vain to fathom the mystery.

"This has been a wretched hoax--you have all been in league to trick
me!" he began.

But Jarvis interrupted menacingly.

"Now, listen. No whining. I stood for a good deal--I knew about that
wireless, and I guess tricks can be played both ways. May I ride with
your chauffeur, your Highness?"

She nodded, and, the obstruction in the road removed, they journeyed
on, slowly but more or less surely, toward the distant castle.

"We will stop at old Pedro's inn to-night, for I am frantic to hear of
my brother," she said as they advanced. Carlos was too deep in thought
to speak again.

And up at that same inn the usual nightly round of medi√¶val revelry was
going on. This ancient structure, indeterminate in age and style of
architecture, was built upon uneven ground. To save expense and
trouble, in the distant days of its inception, it had been built upon
two levels, without the excavating for foundations. Time and the
weather had warped and twisted the old wooden floors and beams so that
by this date it had numerous levels. Yet the remaining furniture was of
substantial oak, and here and there could be seen evidence of the
expenditure, in days long past, of good Spanish gold.

Asleep, with his head on the square table by the fireplace, was Pedro,
the old proprietor. Two villagers sat at another table in the side of
the big room playing cards, with wordy arguments about their winnings
and losses.

A young woman of perhaps twenty-three, dark-skinned, dark-eyed and
dark-tressed, crossed the floor from an adjoining room, to answer a
knock at the door.

From the room she had left came the sound of singing and mandolines.

"Hello, Vardos--any more news?" she asked of the peasant who entered
the portal bearing a basket of food.

"Still no word or sign of the Prince," he said apologetically, avoiding
her scornful look. "Here's yesterday's basket untouched as usual."

"And you left to-day's basket at the castle gate?" she asked sharply.

"Yes, this is the fifteenth night," he replied, looking back at the
door.

"You haven't given up hope yet?"

The man shook his head sadly.

"I gave up hope when he went in. I waited to-night until dark before I
came away from the moat."

"Once to-night I thought I saw a light in the tower, Vardos."

"If you did, Se√±orita Dolores, it was an unblessed flame." He sank into
a chair weakly. "Once when I called to-night a wail came back to me. It
sounded like a sigh of the damned. It may have been only the wind
through the grated window. But it chilled my heart."

"You are a silly coward," retorted Dolores. "But what then, Vardos?"

"When I called the second time something moved in the turret of the
keep, and my soul was joyful. Then, with a harsh cry, a black ugly bird
flew from the turret, straight toward where the sun had set.... On my
left, mind you, the sinister side,--the left--the left!"

The castanets and music in the other room grew louder.

"Oh, if the good Princess were only here!" moaned the girl. "She could
help. She could do something."

"She's on her way," he told her hopelessly, "but what can she do--what
can anyone do, with the imps of darkness all about her?"

"She would go straight into that castle after her brother. Ah, she is a
great lady, with a great heart. Then will the villagers have it said
that they let their own Princess go in alone, as they did their
Prince?"

"God forbid that it should come to that!" muttered the Prince's
retainer, as he handed her the basket. "Good-night, se√±orita."

As he started for the door the girl called after him.

"Will you go again to-morrow, Vardos?"

"Yes, se√±orita. I will go forever, until I know for sure that it is
useless. Good-night."

His words as he passed through the old portal were drowned by the
cheering and applause which followed some especial favorite who had
ended a song.

Dolores looked sadly at the basket, the tears streaming down her face.
She lifted the napkin, showing the simple but nourishing food which had
been untouched by the missing Prince. She crossed herself, with a
whispered prayer for his safety, crossing the room to the ancient
pantry.

The dreams of Pedro were rudely interrupted. The big door suddenly
opened to admit a character very different from the weaklings who made
his tavern their rendezvous. He was dark-skinned as the rest of the
crew, red-faced as old Pedro (from the same faithful indulgence in
vintages), not younger than forty, yet aggressive, vibrating with
physical power, elasticity, and an overweening insolence. His manner of
approach--and he entered this tavern with the same studied grace with
which he swaggered into half a hundred others--seemed to indicate that
he delighted in disorganizing and terrorizing whatever he might find
established and orderly--wherever he might find it!

Beholding the somnolent proprietor, he advanced quietly to the middle
of the big room. Then, with malicious enjoyment of the effect, he
banged his riding-crop violently upon the table, close to the tavern
keeper's ear.

"Hey, you Pedro!" he roared. "Wake up, you blockhead--wake up, I say!"

There was only a response of snores.

"You, Pedro, attention! What's the matter here? Where are you? Wake up
and stop your dreaming!"

At this the startled landlord leaped to his feet, bowing through force
of habit.

"Ah, Se√±or Robledo! One thousand pardons!" he gasped timorously. "What
can I do for you, sir?"

"You're a wretch of a tavern keeper," and the newcomer advanced upon
the unhappy Pedro as though about to slay him for his drowsiness.

"Yes, se√±or! You are always right." The man humbly endeavored to
collect his wits. "How may I serve your lordship?"

The bully swaggered, puffed his cheeks, and feeling that his host was
finally awake to the seriousness of the situation, he cried out once
more: "My horse stands outside by the post. He has been hard ridden,
for I have come on an important mission. Varlet, go out and wash his
mouth, dry him down, and don't give him water until he has cooled off.
Are you finally awake, you idiotic Pedro?"

The tavern keeper gulped fearsomely, and bowed his most fetching bow,
without result.

"My horse is almost dead on his legs. Be kind to him. I've had a hard
ride over these miserable province roads. As for me--I want a flask of
... well ... of something decent. I know that's not in your line. Step
lively now; and mind you, draw it from your private cask. My temper is
no better than it should be, to-night."

The old man bowed and started to leave the big room.

The blustering guest howled at him once more, punctuating his remarks
with the butt of the whip.

"Where's your daughter?"

The old man trembled and bowed once more.

"I'll call her," Pedro said apologetically. "She'll be right here,
sir."

He went to the door at the right, and shouted quaveringly: "Dolores!
Dolores! Dolores!... There, se√±or, she will come at once."

"And, Pedro--if that rat-infested larder of yours is empty, get it
filled before the Duke arrives," added Robledo. "Yes ... the Duke. He
is coming to-night. Don't stand and stare, but hurry up and see to my
horse."

"Yes, se√±or!... Yes, yes!"

And he tottered away on his errands.

Dolores had entered in response to the call. At first she did not
observe the newcomer, whose back was toward her.

"Yes, father," she began. "Why do you wish me?"

"Dolores," Robledo turned toward her impatiently. "Did you not know I
had come?"

"Oh, it's you?" and there was a scornful sniff from the girl.

"Well, well, can't you say you're glad to see me?"

The jade was hard to impress, where others showed abjection before the
terrorist.

"I can, but I won't. Where's my father?"

"Never mind your father--I want to talk to you."

"Is it so, Se√±or Robledo? Well, you won't in that tone."

He intercepted her in the center of the room, catching her wrist and
turning her about to face him.

"What do you want to say to me?"

"You little devil!... Come here, don't try to get away." The girl was
tugging to release herself. "What's come over you these days? You are
about as fond and sweet-tempered as a tigress. Anyone would think that
you didn't care for me at all. What have I done, Dolores?"

"It is what you have not done. For fifteen days your Prince has been in
need of you, and you have not had the courage to go to him. Let go my
wrist."

Don Robledo laughed, yet with a quaver in his voice, for there was a
depth of passion here, intensified by the spirited resistance of the
girl.

"Who's the little spitfire trying to tear to pieces now?"

"You!" she snapped back. "Don Robledo--sword-fighter--toreador--fire-eater
--hero of a hundred duels!... You--Don Robledo--_coward_!"

He clumsily chuckled her under the chin.

"I asked you to-day," she continued, as she threw his hand away from
her face, "I begged you to go into the castle and rescue your Prince. I
ask you now to answer the signal that I just saw in the tower window,
where he can see our lights. Perhaps he has burned something, a scrap
of paper, in the hope that some of you, his retainers, would notice it
and come to his assistance. But--he doesn't know what a pack of cowards
you all are, or he would have saved his matches. So, it's Don
Robledo--_coward_!"

The big man snarled.

"Coward--never a coward in a fair fight in the open, and I'll meet the
best man that walks the earth." Here he faced the inquisitive and
thoroughly awed villagers. "Any two or three!"

He banged the table with his riding-crop to punctuate the emphasis.

"I don't ask you to kill one or two or three of these poor whimpering
sheep of Seguro. I ask you to dare something, at risk to yourself. To
go to the aid of your Prince.... There isn't a man among you--who
_dares_! _Dios!_ How I could love _such a man_!"

They had not heard the thrum of the motors on the roadway outside. The
door opened, and the first of the party to enter was the Duke. He
walked quietly into the room, overhearing the words of Dolores.

"A pretty little speech!" he observed sarcastically.

"Your Excellency!" cried Robledo, taking off his hat. "Welcome back to
Seguro."

"Yes, I am well come to Seguro."

The natives doffed their hats, and like Pedro bowed and howled in the
time-honored peasant way.

"The Duke! The Duke!"

"Pedro, go out and help the Princess and her servants with the luggage.
I want to speak to you alone, Robledo. Hurry, while the others are
delayed with that execrable car. I walked a hundred yards to get here
first."

He turned toward Dolores with a scowl.

"Those are charming sentiments for your fellow-townsmen, whose healthy
common sense prevents them from rushing to a fool's death. Still, all
fools are not dead yet. One of them will be here to-night. And you,
se√±orita, will doubtless be pleased to look over him, as he has come
all the way from America for the privilege of entering the castle and
playing your hero."

Dolores looked at Robledo, as she parried:

"And did her Highness have to go all the way to America to find him?"

"Yes, indeed. He's from America, where all the fools come from!"

And the villagers joined in a merry chorus of intelligent laughter!




XIII

"GENTLEMEN, A MAN!"


Dolores had hurried upstairs, where she well knew there was a tiny
attic in the rambling old building which acted as an excellent
whispering gallery. Every word spoken in the larger room below could be
heard from this vantage. She was no sooner secreted there than she
heard the voice of the Duke.

"You received my telegram sent to San Fernandez?"

"Yes, Excellency. Antonio brought it over with the mail-bags."

"What about the Prince?"

"Ah, Excellency ... why ask? The same news as before. This stupid
Vardos has been taking food to the castle every day, but he is too
frightened to venture into the miserable old pile of stones. It is most
droll, your Excellency."

"Well then, Robledo, I am satisfied as far as that goes. But you have
work before you of a new character."

The swordsman struck a chair with his riding-crop. It seemed a favorite
stage effect with him; the Duke was not slow in catching its
significance.

"Just forget these little affectations, my good man," he said
haughtily. "None of this blustering around me. I know that you do your
work well, and at other times there is much to be desired. Now, in this
case, you have a dangerous man to combat. And the combat must be final,
no matter how difficult."

"How is he dangerous?" and there was a new note in Robledo's blustering
voice.

"Unless he is stopped he may cause trouble for the traditions of
Seguro. He is crafty as a _contrabandisto_, cunning as the snakes of
the Pyrenees! He has been brought here by my cousin the Princess to
make some special investigations." He laughed, with that cruel,
mirthless inflection so characteristic. "She should have left that to
me--and she will be sorry ere it is all over. This man has thwarted me
twice already. Coming over on the steamer from America the scoundrel
disappeared from the ship most remarkably, just when I had all arranged
to put him into duress in Liverpool. I have yet to learn the secret of
it. He must be discouraged ... you understand, Robledo?"

"Excellency, I can assure you that the Yankee pig will be convinced, in
a language which he will understand, that his presence in the castle
to-night is quite unnecessary. Have you any particular instructions?"

The Duke shook his head and grimaced suggestively.

"Any way you please, Robledo. You understand my general ideas on such
subjects. Means are of no consequence to a born statesman. Results are
the only permanent things in this world. However--I warn you. Don't
underestimate your man. He will shoot; I imagine that he can shoot
quickly and without a tremor."

"Ha, ha! Good opposition. I welcome such an antagonist--these
fat-brained peasants about here are too simple to stimulate me to good
work. I have been growing dull and commonplace--I am almost out of
training, as they call it in the bull-ring."

"Come then, and I will give Pedro some money to buy drinks for the
stupid dolts,--they can drink my health: it is none of the best these
days, Robledo. My American trip was wearing. It is a wretched,
unromantic hole--not a country, just a great mob of people."

"I can well believe your Excellency. This way, sir."

They returned to the big room of the tavern, and Dolores retired from
the temporary confessional box. Her face showed mixed emotions--but
predominating over any other influence was the great desire to serve
the rulers of her family. Curiously loyal are these humble peasants of
the inland Latin districts. Their lives follow the monotonous example
of the generations before them: as their grandsires, their fathers were
tradesmen of a certain calling, so do they follow the strata, contented
to exist with the conventional beginning, moderately happy middle era,
and inevitably stupid ending of their lives.

It is this which is so pleasing to the European aristocrats: no matter
how bankrupt, incompetent, disreputable, the class theory which is
recognized by the masses is, "Once a gentleman, always a gentleman."

It is inconceivable upon the Continent for a peasant's or even a
tradesman's son or daughter to aspire to a higher level than that of
the family. Exceptions to the rule are looked upon with distrust by
superiors as well as the lowly equals: too much ambition is a
temptation to the gods which is hardly respectable.

There is a smug contentment, then, in the feudal countries which is the
surest bulwark of the "divine right of kings"--and courtiers! A
pleasantly distended belly, a mellow thrill from cheap wine, a
certainty about the repetition of regular meals and drinks, with enough
clothes and shelter to maintain relative positions with the
neighbors--this year, next year, and twenty years from now ... these
things are the mess of pottage for which the Esaus of the kingdoms and
principalities sell their birthrights and their souls!

Vardos--for instance--bodyservant and sole military retainer of a
princely line which for generation after generation had considered
itself in humiliating straits unless there were at least a thousand
lances at beck and call--old Vardos had been thrown into a mental
maelstrom by the sudden change in the lifelong existence. Sure of his
meals and a modicum of money for occasional visits to taprooms, he was
now placed in a position of responsibility, one where executive and
aggressiveness were demanded. Here old Vardos failed, because he was a
peasant true to his type. The poor fellow had struggled with his grief
these fifteen days--now he felt, with a helpless aching of the faithful
heart, that he must have been in a sense responsible for the death of
his master. He had pleaded with the young Prince not to enter the
accursed place.

Insanity and suicide though it seemed to be to him, he could not help
it. That was bad enough--but with the prospect of the beautiful
Princess going into the place as well: life had become a horrible thing
to him.

He sought the wayside shrine down the crooked village street. He threw
himself upon his knees before it, vowing candles to every saint who had
granted petty favors to him in the past!

He faced the great cathedral, rearing its pale crest in the dim light
from the stars, vast and exalted above the miserable squalor of those
whose ancestors had created its grandeur with their inspired devotion.
He told the Holy Family and the saints, with tear-choked voice, the
quandary of his noble master, and begged that, though they should never
grant him another request, somehow, somewhere, they find and bring a
gallant adventurer who could turn defeat into victory, one more willing
and competent than himself, to die!

And the answer to this prayer was unburdening his own soul with
semi-religious phrases, in a Kentucky accent, addressed with unwonted
and even picturesque fluency at the stumbling, stodgy Rusty Snow, who
trudged along loaded with luggage and an insatiate hatred of this
"cussed foreign joint," as he labeled it to himself.

The Princess and her maid had, at Jarvis' suggestion, left them with
the automobile in its latest quagmire, to reach the shelter of the inn.
So it was that, as her vassal and his vassal struggled with the luggage
in the dark, she reached the portal of the house of Pedro.

Robledo was hearkening carefully to certain careful instructions from
the Duke of Alva, nodding with a smile of malicious portent at the
final words.

"I will not fall short of my former reputation, your Excellency,"
declared the Don. "When a man reaches my time of life, after a success
in the bull-ring as toreador, in the army as a duelist, and in the
private retinue of so distinguished a nobleman as yourself, he has a
certain pride in his ability.... Indeed, I regret that I must waste my
talents upon a stupid pig of a Yankee."

Shaking his head, Carlos drew out his purse.

"The man is no idiot, unfortunately. He has completely won the
confidence of the Princess, despite his obvious trickeries. Now,
however, I would like to attend to a few little tasks of cleaning up
after that miserable trip."

Pedro was approaching them subserviently, a humble, bobbing head
betokening his anxiety to please the fine folk.

"Anything else, your Excellency?" he stammered, overcome with the pomp
and majesty of the situation.

"Here, my good man, take this coin and have the brave lads in the
taproom drink to my health and that of her Exalted Highness, the
Princess Maria Theresa."

With studied carelessness, he dropped the coin upon the floor, and
Pedro chased the rolling golden disk with surprising agility.

"Then bring me up some hot water, soap, and towels. You may prepare a
hasty supper, as well--but let it be fit for a gentleman to eat!"

"Yes, yes! Your Excellency!" and Pedro nearly brought back his
rheumatic spell by the renewed bobbing of the stiff old back, as he
retreated to the barroom.

He returned promptly after breaking the gladsome tidings of the treat,
and led the nobleman up the stairway, as a chorus of cheers rang out
from the alcoholic ward.

"The Duke! The Duke! His Excellency the Duke of Alva!"

Robledo walked to the door, with his characteristic swashbuckler
rhythm, and stirred them up to more enthusiasm.

"Louder, you beggars, or I'll give you something to yell about--louder,
I say!"

Dolores had slipped through the doorway, facing the road.

Suddenly she danced in through the entry again, happy and exultant.

"Her Highness has come, father. Her Highness!"

Old Pedro stumbled toward the balcony and peered over at her
querulously.

"Father, father!"

"What is it, Dolores?"

"Her Highness, the Princess!"

The old man bustled down the stairs, trembling with added excitement,
just as Maria Theresa and Nita were bowed into the tavern by a villager
who had accompanied them from the delayed machine.

The peasants trooped into the room from the tap, howling with medi√¶val
enthusiasm.

"Your Gracious Highness does my humble inn great honor," began Pedro,
as his local guests imitated the clumsy courtesy with varying ability.

"Thank you, Pedro," replied the Princess graciously as one would
address a polite child.

She held out her hand to Dolores, who kissed it reverently, with a bow
and a bend of the knee.

"Your Highness, we are poorly prepared for this great favor, ill
prepared indeed," apologized Dolores. "Your exalted cousin gave us but
short warning of your coming. Our humble tavern is hardly fitting for a
great lady."

"My child, any place to remove the dust of travel will do for me." She
turned toward the villager at the door. "Tell my chauffeur that when he
repairs the car I shall want it kept in readiness to use again."

Nita advanced anxiously.

"Your Highness is not thinking of going to the castle to-night,
surely?" Her voice was politely remonstrative, with a note of
apprehensiveness for the welfare of her mistress.

"But I must have news," declared the young woman impatiently. "I am
frantic with worry, and the things which Jos√© has told me. Come to a
room, Nita."

"Ah, your Highness, you are too brave, too determined. You are all worn
out with this long trip. Better to wait until daylight, if I may be so
bold as to suggest to your ladyship. You are all unstrung just now."

Maria Theresa did indeed show the strain of the nerve-racking trip, but
she valiantly shook her head.

"Show me up, Dolores. When Mr. Warren, my representative, arrives
inform him that I will be down very soon. Come, Nita, for I know that
your hands can rest me, with their skillful massage," and she spoke
wearily.

Pedro stepped forward, bowing.

"Allow me the honor, your Highness. I have the finest chamber in the
tavern prepared for you--a fire to take the night chill from the
largest bedroom."

She started up the steps, followed by her maid and the old man, still
risking a strained back with his excited bows.

Again she turned to Dolores, with a strange nervousness, to say: "Do
not forget to explain to Mr. Warren. He may think I have left the
tavern. I will see him soon."

"I will give your commands to the Se√±or Americano, your Highness,"
promised the black-eyed Dolores, with a heightened color.

Then the Princess disappeared across the end of the balcony. Dolores
walked to the doorway, and discerned two figures approaching with a
strange slowness.

"Is this the inn?" cried a voice, with a slight foreign accent in the
Spanish.

"Yes, yes, se√±or. Come in, se√±or, we are expecting you," replied the
girl.

The villagers were still grouped about the door to the taproom. Dolores
stepped back, as Warren Jarvis and Rusty Snow entered the big front
hallway, and blinked in the unaccustomed glare of light.

They were both burdened with suitcases, and two of the Princess'
hatboxes. These they dropped unceremoniously on the floor, with sighs
of relief.

"We're here, Rusty, with both feet!"

"Yassir," and the negro groaned with exhaustion, "and I'd jest as lieve
be back in Meadow Green. Dis don't look very scrumptious for a Mrs.
Princessess' plantation house."

"This is no castle, Rusty. This is only the halfway house."

Dolores could not understand their low conversation in English--and
Afro-Americanese! But she had studied the clear features, the
nonchalant bearing of the tall American. She turned toward the
sheep-like, staring villagers, and with an eloquent wave of her hand
she cried out resonantly:

"Gentlemen--_a man_!"

[Illustration: "_Gentlemen--a man_"]

Jarvis was lighting his cigarette, and he laughed, with a side-remark
to his valet:

"Rusty, as the Indians said to Columbus: 'We're discovered!'" He turned
toward the girl. "Did you by any chance address me, fair se√±orita?"

"I'm calling the attention of these valiant gentlemen of Seguro to the
only man with spirit and bravery enough to enter the haunted castle,"
she declared.

"How did you know?" and his eyes widened with surprise. This was a
queer place.

"All Seguro knows by this time, se√±or."

At these words, Don Robledo swaggered in through the door from the bar.
He pushed the villagers aside with contemptuous roughness. He even
thrust the girl out of his way as she tried to detain him. He laughed
insultingly into the bland face of Jarvis.

"So, you are the _brave_ American, are you?" he cried, surveying
Jarvis, with hands on hips and stocky legs well spread.

[Illustration: "_So, you are the brave American, are you?_"]

Jarvis puffed cigarette smoke at him and answered with ingenuous
modesty.

"I'm _an_ American. And here" (he waved his hand to Rusty, who saluted
with divination of the tenor of the interchange) "I present to your
notice another American. In fact, we're both Americans!"

"And you both want to die?" cried Don Robledo, drawing a stiff
forefinger suggestively across his brawny throat. Rusty was reading the
pantomime with perfect understanding. He made a wry face and rolled his
eyes at Jarvis, who responded with a droll wink.

"Well, now that you mention it, I'm in no hurry about it. I'm not at
all anxious on the subject."

He sat down in one of the carven chairs and continued to puff his
cigarette with provoking amiability.

Robeldo leaned forward toward him and snarled:

"You had better keep out of the castle then. It has a fatal climate."

Warren laughed, and flicked the ashes of the cigarette upon the sleeve
of his interviewer.

"Oh, you mean the castle ghost--this old rummy who can't sleep in his
grave of nights? Ha, ha! I'm not afraid of a little trifle like that,
se√±or."

Robledo stepped back threateningly, and yet with hesitation caused by
the perplexing simplicity of this foreigner.

"No?... Well, se√±orita, we gentlemen of Seguro will gladly drink to
your American hero! Here, lads, is a toast to the maddest fool that
ever came to Spain!"

He turned contemptuously on his heel, with military precision. Then he
chuckled Dolores under the chin with a leer, to have his hand
indignantly pushed aside. As the girl glared at him with a flash of
hatred in her eyes, he stalked into the taproom, followed by the ready
topers.

"Pile these bags on the table, Rusty," ordered Warren, as he smiled
winningly at the girl.

"Yassir. We kin use 'em for one of these yere barracadies, if we has
to."

"It looks as though we're booked for a warm reception in Seguro, Rusty.
Doesn't it?"

Rusty rolled those chalky optics, with an expression of mingled
drollery, apprehension, and confidence in his master's ability to lead
the battle. It is wonderful how much expression can be condensed into a
darky's eyes!

"Yassir. It's some tropical, dat's shore. But, you-all ain't no
cold-storage rooster yohself, Marse Warren. A little Kaintucky
ammanition might make some echoes 'round dis confabulation."

From the taproom came loud howls of derision from the associated
village sports of Seguro.

"That ward heeler seems to be making a campaign speech, Rusty. He may
be making a few promises that he can't fulfill after he gets elected,"
observed the Kentuckian, with pursed lips. "Listen to them holler!"

Rusty looked over his shoulder, while Dolores studied these two types
with girlish curiosity, as they chattered in their alien tongue. She
had never seen a man unafraid of Don Robledo but his distinguished
Excellency, the Duke, before. It gave her a new thrill.

"He's a mighty nice man, he is. Mighty nice, Marse Warren. He's almos'
too nice, ain't he?"

Warren shook his head, with a serious look on the usually laughing
face.

"No, Rusty, not too nice--yet! He'll be a lot nicer before he's ten
years older. I think his education has been neglected. You and I must
begin to keep school around this township. There's nothing so nice as
education, especially when the school-teacher has a nice long rattan
concealed up his sleeve!"




XIV

MORE OBSTACLES


Dolores approached the Kentuckian politely, yet eagerly.

"Pardon, se√±or, but I have a message for you from her Highness."

"What is it?"

"She instructed me to tell you that she would see you very soon."

"Thanks, se√±orita. And may I ask--who was the cheerful, frolicsome
individual who flattered me with that polite toast? Is he one of the
royal family, taking a little vacation in this neighborhood?"

The girl reddened, then laughed.

"No, se√±or. He is well known in this part of our country. His name is
Don Robledo."

Warren lit another cigarette, and studied her attractive face with the
gallant interest of a Southerner, who is always prone to admire beauty.
She was embarrassed, yet pleased, under the unmistakable scrutiny.

"Don Robledo. He seems to be well acquainted with you, se√±orita. Is he
one of the family?"

"No, but he wishes to be!" she snapped out. "And he shall never be
until he changes his manners and...."

"And his face? I don't really care for his face. If I were a girl I
would never leave home and mother for that face. But of course, that's
none of my business."

He stopped for an instant to absorb the rowdy racket from the taproom.

"Either he's a wonderful spender or he has unlimited credit with the
bar cashier. Maybe he eats his checks ... it has been done. But I don't
like that name. It sounds dangerous--and yet it doesn't seem to mean
much, after all, to me."

The girl looked at him earnestly.

"It may mean much before you reach the castle. More than you suspect,
se√±or--you have been the subject of much serious talk in this tavern
before you were ever seen here."

"And how was that? I'm really a very unimportant person, you know."

"Let me tell you something, while I have the opportunity. You are in
great danger here. Se√±or, I wish to help you. I have tried for weeks to
stir up some manhood in the hearts of these cowardly sheep in Seguro.
The Prince has been missing for days, since he went into that castle. I
want to save my beloved Princess from the same fate which I fear
overtook him when he braved the horrors of that castle. It is a place
of Satan, se√±or."

The American smiled at her, as he asked:

"Now, do you really believe in all that superstitious trash, my good
girl? You look intelligent."

The girl crossed herself piously.

"Have we not been taught by the priest, of the fiends who haunt the
earth and wreck human happiness? How can I say such things could not
happen, for the sins of bygone people? Not that I would think anything
but love and respect for the Prince and his wonderful sister, her
Highness! But, se√±or, I feel the same as do the other dwellers of
Seguro."

"And how is that?"

"I feel that strange things have gone on in that castle. Even a great
gentleman like the Duke says so. Surely if educated noblemen put faith
in such things, we simple folk are not far wrong to believe what we are
taught. But still..."

"Yes, there you are, my good girl. You have a 'but still'--and that
means a doubt. The doubts of the world have been the foundation stones
of modern freedom--it was the doubts of the old farmers and traders
back in America which threw off the yoke of the old kingdom, and made a
great free country. If you have a doubt you may be saved. As for the
Duke--the only god he pays allegiance to is himself--and he's not been
so sure of that divinity during these last iconoclastic ten days."

"I don't understand, Se√±or Warren?" she replied, in bewilderment.

"Of course you don't, or you wouldn't be kow-towing to this royalty
stuff, and you would hand a bottle to that Don Roughhouse or whatever
his name is, right on his classic brow, with a classic smash. You ought
to see how an American girl would treat one of these big bullies! Well,
what about my danger? It never worries me when I know where and when
and how to expect it. Whatever you tell will be absolutely our secret."

Dolores looked at Rusty, who was struggling with a cigarette--he was
more accustomed to Pittsburgh stogies, but his motto in life was based
on the famous advice concerning Roman imitation!

"How about the Se√±or Moor, se√±or? May you trust him?" she asked
nervously.

"Rusty is no Moor--he's an Afro-Methodist, my girl. He can't understand
Spanish anyway, even though he's the best little guesser this side of
the Ohio River. But I'd trust Rusty with my life. Go ahead with the
danger signals."

She heard a footfall on the balcony above them.

"Let me pretend to read your palm, se√±or. I know we are being watched."

"All right, read away--my palm will show you that after this trip
through Spain my clothesline needs washing. But, what's the fortune of
the castle?"

It was the old Jarvis, now--blithesome, devil-may-worry, shrewd, and
recovered completely, through the change of scene and a certain new
interest in life which the reader may have already divined.

The girl led him away from beneath the balcony, to the side of the big
fireplace. She took up his hand and examined it carefully.

Nor did her shrewd eyes miss the face on the balcony,--that of the Duke
of Alva! She exaggerated her studious examination, and then in a low
tone proceeded with the explanation of the lines of fate and life.

"Every one of these breaks in your lifeline shows a moment when you
stood face to face with death. Ah, se√±or, in all my experience I have
never seen such an adventurous palm.... You have stood elbow to elbow
with death, and yet those little squares about the breaks show a
guiding spirit of protection."

[Illustration: "_Ah, se√±or, in all my experience I have never seen such
an adventurous palm...._"]

Warren was beginning to be bored. Yet something in the girl's furtive
glances toward the balcony, which did not miss his own sharp eyes,
convinced him that she was endeavoring to get a message to him.

She continued, her own hand trembling unmistakably.

"Ah, Se√±or Americano, there is one break which has not yet been reached
by the line of time. The protecting square of your guardian saint is
not perfect there, as with the others."

The Kentuckian laughed incredulously.

"Oh, I guess I can build up a square when the time comes and let the
break take care of itself."

"But the time is now," and her voice was tremulously low.

"Now--what do you mean, now?"

She nodded her head, and with half-closed eyes gazed at the fireplace
significantly.

"And are the fortune-teller's eyes so brilliant and so keen that they
can light up the future and behold the day and the hour?" queried
Jarvis.

"Not my eyes, se√±or," and her voice died down to a whisper, "but my
ears."

The step of the Duke was upon the resonant stairs.

"In all my experience I have seen but one hand like yours, se√±or,--it
speaks of danger; and that hand belongs to Don Robledo, to Don
Robledo!"

The nobleman's voice cut short the s√©ance. There was a warning note in
it.

"Well, Dolores, and why are you not attending her Highness? You know
the house, and she needs assistance."

"Pardon, se√±or." She stepped back and courtesied to Carlos, who came
down the stairs, advancing toward Warren. "I will go at once, your
Excellency."

"Good-by, se√±orita; I'll take good care of the little square. Thanks
for your occult wisdom," were Warren's smiling words, as he looked at
the Duke.

"Well, Mr. Warren. Looking into the future?"

"Yes, Duke, and the immediate future promises to be very interesting.
That little fortune-teller has occult powers, indeed. A dark man is to
cross my path soon."

Carlos had crossed the room to a position from where he could look into
the taproom. He seemed to be satisfied with what he saw there. He
turned toward the American.

"Do you believe in such foolery, Mr. Warren? I had thought you too
intelligent to believe in superstitious things like fortune-reading."

"I like to believe some of these things on this occasion, for I hope it
means someone I very much want to meet."

The Duke now approached him very earnestly.

"Mr. Warren, I feel a certain responsibility for her Highness, and all
that pertains to my cousin. The prospect of your death to-night is most
uncomfortable, when it can be so easily avoided by your own common
sense. I seriously advise your waiting until the morning."

"So, you don't think I'll come back?"

"I think that if you go to the castle to-night, you take your life in
your own hands."

Warren opened and shut his sinewy fingers, and laughed back: "I've got
a pretty good grip."

"Look here," put in the nobleman. "You Americans are noted as being
shrewd traders. You get dollar for dollar when you bargain--and
generally a few extra dollars. You are not going to give your life away
for nothing, are you?"

"Oh, it is not worth very much," retorted Jarvis. "The deal was made on
a bargain day. My life happened to be a little below par, and a good
customer came along."

There was a comprehensive sparkle in the dark Spanish eyes, to meet the
twinkle in the firm blue ones.

"Ah, I begin to see a light. Well, Mr. Warren, I am willing to release
you from your offer and the bargain and meet your terms now."

"Your Excellency, I am overwhelmed at the generosity, but the price was
paid, the receipt given, and the bookkeeper has closed up the office.
I'm on the job, and I'm certainly going to stay."

The Duke snarled, as he inquired: "I suppose that means that you are
foolish enough to keep faith with her Highness?"

"Yes."

"I never saw a man quite so anxious to be killed, Mr. Jarvis; but such
is sometimes the case where, as it has been said: 'Fools rush in where
angels fear to tread.'"

Jarvis laughed provokingly.

"I'd rather be an energetic fool than an angel with cold feet."

"I don't understand you, sir."

"Well, I understand you, your Excellency."

The Duke turned toward the fireplace.

"I am sorry for you," he remarked.

Jarvis walked over close to the nobleman and looked him straight in the
eyes, as he spoke with unusual meaning vibrant in his voice.

"Your Excellency, your sympathy, your offer, and your advice are all
declined, without thanks.... I once saw a gambler lay down four
aces,--just think of it, four fat aces. He looked the dealer straight
in the eye, as I am doing now with you. Then he said, 'The play ain't
natural.'... Now, you have tried to have me arrested on the steamer,
then you tipped off Scotland Yard and, for all I know, the Paris
police, too. You have tried to block me every way you could, and you're
a regular little prize blocker. Suddenly you express the utmost anxiety
as to what's going to happen to me in the castle. You generously offer
to buy me off. You advise me, with tears in your eyes, to stay away and
save my life. Shall I take the bait--hook, line, and sinker? Duke, 'the
play ain't natural'!"

The nobleman clenched his fists in anger.

"You have intruded into a matter which you neither understand nor
appreciate. If, as you say, the play seems unnatural, then throw down
your cards and stay out of the game."

"Oh, no, no, no!" and Jarvis' voice again had that provokingly teasing
tone in it. "I'll just stay right in the game and play my hand out--and
watch every deal."

He turned toward Rusty.

"Come along, and let's see if we can find the landlord. We'll have a
look at our rooms," he said. "Hurry, Rusty--don't go to sleep--the
bedrooms are upstairs."

Rusty was very thoughtful as he picked up the bags and began to follow.
The Duke watched the two with sidelong glances. Both characters were
mysteries to him--so different, nonchalant, and unaffected by this
serious task. Europeans would have taken the case at least with greater
seriousness.

"What's the matter with you, Rusty? In love?"

The negro was lost in a deep study, as he sniffed the air in a
thoughtful, absent-minded fashion.

"Marse Warren, I'd like to find a piece of chicken!"

"Great Scott! What put that into your head?"

"Oh, lawsee, Marse Warren, I'se powerful hungry! It ain't human to be
so hungry!"

"What--again?"

"No, sir; it's de same old hunger. No matter how fast de train go I
jes' cain't leave it behin'. Oh my, if I on'y had some po'k chops an' a
little real gin!"

Jarvis started on toward the steps.

"Well, you come on now, Rusty--you don't eat a thing until we finish
this job."

Rusty shook his head despairingly.

"Good Lawd, does I have to wait ontel you is dead--before I kin eat my
vittles?"

He followed his master across the room, just as the Princess came to
the balcony and started down the stairs.

"Well, Mr. Warren," added the Duke, "all Seguro will be buzzing with
your ghost-hunt to-night. The whole town will sit up to hear the
outcome."

The Kentuckian turned to look at the speaker.

"And where are you going to hear the returns of the battle, your
Excellency?"

"Unfortunately, I must leave at once--I have an urgent summons from
Madrid."

Jarvis shook his head in mock sorrow.

"That's too bad, sure enough. I'm sorry we're to lose the inspiration
of your company. Won't you even be around at the finish? Surely, you
take that much interest in the little breaking party, your Excellency."

"I am sorry, Mr. Warren, but I must go," answered the nobleman,
writhing under the sarcasm, but never losing the smooth control of his
words and studied reserve.

"Well, I call that a doggoned shame!" and Jarvis started again for the
stairs.

The beautiful girl was just coming down, and the Duke's eyes came
together in an angry squint as he saw the warmth of the glance which
she bestowed upon the American.

"Here, Pedro,--this is Mr. Warren and his man. Attend to his wants."

"Yes, your Highness," and Pedro once more strained the faithful spine
with a series of gutta-percha bows. "This way, sirs, to your rooms,"
and he led them up the stairs.

Jarvis turned on the step and faced her.

"Your Highness, I would like to have a couple of good horses, and two
lanterns. I don't want to let any grass grow under my feet on the trip
to the castle to-night."

She gave the order to Pedro, and he promised to bring the required
objects with sturdy steeds.

"Ah, Mr. Warren, looking for an honest man, like old Socrates?"
inquired the Duke of Alva.

[Illustration: "_Ah, Mr. Warren, looking for an honest man, like old
Socrates?_"]

"Not in this neck of the woods, your Excellency!" and Jarvis
disappeared in the balcony entrance to the old line of bedrooms.

Maria Theresa turned anxiously to her cousin.

"Carlos, what news of my brother? Have you heard anything yet?"

"Not a thing, Maria. I am very sorry."

"And yet I heard you say that you were leaving for Madrid?" she
questioned.

"Yes. The message is from his Gracious Majesty the King. You know how
important a summons that is."

"But why must you go so soon? Why not wait overnight at Pedro's tavern,
here?"

"Ah, my dear cousin, you know how long the ride before I connect with
the railroad to Madrid."

The girl wrung her hands, nervous at last, and her appealing eyes would
have softened a gentler heart than that of the steely Carlos.

"But, Carlos, my brother--your princely cousin--may be dying, he may be
dead. Here am I alone with no kinsman at my side if you leave."

The Duke protested, dramatically.

"Maria, I must obey my King!"

"To leave me, after all your protestations! You have not the time nor
courage to stay and help me in this hour."

Carlos laughed bitterly, pointing toward the distant room of Warren's.

"What need of me, my dear? You have this marvel of Sir Galahads, the
Ghost Breaker!"

She dropped her head and answered slowly, "So, that is your excuse?"

He caught eagerly at what he deemed his opportunity. He snatched her
hand, although it was as promptly pulled away.

"I make no excuses, my dear Maria. I need none. But you know the
truth--that Yankee adventurer stands between you and me. He is of the
common herd,--you and I of the bluest blood in Spain. Send him away,
now--to-night, and I will do anything for you. I will postpone my
journey to the King, at any sacrifice of displeasure. I'll send one of
my men into the castle to find your brother."

She turned scornfully toward him, her eyes flashing.

"Yes--you will send one of your men--but you are not brave enough to go
there yourself. Yet you ask me to send away this man, who of all of you
is the only one willing to sacrifice his life for me?"

Carlos snapped his tapering fingers angrily, as he clutched his
sword-cane. His swarthy face was chalky under the stress of the
emotion, as he replied savagely:

"If he stays, I go!"

"Very well; then, Carlos--you force me to make a choice. I choose a
real man."

Carlos caught her by the arm.

"You are too interested in this worthless pretender, Maria! I love you
myself, and with the keenness of love I have watched you follow him
with your eyes, have seen the growing warmth in your voice--all through
those days on the ocean, aboard the _Mauretania_. I warn you--royal
princesses must aim higher than the common herd."

"Go, Carlos Hernando! It is I who am the superior--I the one to
abjure!"

Jarvis was sauntering down the steps, and he was greeted by a confused
look in the girl's eyes. Carlos took his hat and coat from the table.
Maliciously he hoped that the American had been eavesdropping, for thus
he might be encouraged to presumption--and the Duke was certain that of
all women in the world the least susceptible to presumption was his
haughty kinswoman.

"Well, Maria, you are sending him to his death--and as for you, Mr.
Ghost Breaker, I wish you success, when you beard the specter in his
den!"

With mock dignity at first, Jarvis's voice grew more menacing as he
completed the words of retort:

"Thanks, your Gracious Excellency!... I'll do my best to tie a can to
the specter's tail--and the can will be loaded with fireworks!"

As he left, Warren turned with a cheery grin, to face Maria.

"We must start at once, Mr. Warren," she urged, "for any moment may be
my brother's last."

"Courage! If your brother is there, I'll find him. You must be patient
and remain here, where you are safe,--try to rest up from that
blood-curdling trip from Paris."

"But, Mr. Warren, I cannot rest or even sit still until I know what has
become of him. I shall go mad if I am left alone!"

The womanly tears began to stream down her face. They melted a hitherto
calm portion of Warren Jarvis' heart.

"Now, my dear child," and he paused timidly, as though to learn whether
or not the familiarity had offended her. Instead, she looked up through
the long wet lashes with anything but an angry glance. "My dear child,
I must insist on one condition."

"What's that?"

"Let me go ahead and look over the ground. I will signal when it is
safe to follow. I have reasons of my own for wanting to get there
without losing a minute; otherwise, I would wait until to-morrow, to
look it over by daylight and lay my own trap. But I will surely let you
know if I have found him."

"How can you signal, Mr. Warren Jarvis? We have no telephones in
Seguro." Jarvis walked over toward the old paneled window.

"With a light. See over here--there is the castle; you can of course
see it through the window. I was asking all sorts of questions of old
Pedro when he was in my room. He knows every foot of that land, even if
he has been afraid to go near it for fifteen years or so."

"Well, what will you do?"

"Just as Paul Revere's friend did in the early days in my country: I'll
put a light somewhere in one of those towers, and you can see it from
this room or through one of the windows upstairs here. It will shine in
an hour at the most. You won't have long to wait!"

"But if it does not shine?" and she paled at the thought.

"I'll be too busy swapping lead for brimstone with Mr. Spook to stop
and hang a lantern!"




XV

MYSTERIOUS INFLUENCES


The Princess of Aragon gazed into the republican eyes of the Kentuckian
with a glowing fire which was contrary to all rules and conventions of
the divine right of kings. No common man should have been given such a
glimpse of empire; but, in justice to the magic of such glances which
come once from the eyes of every good woman, for some good man, in each
lifetime, it must be acknowledged that their potent wizardry turns the
commonplace, even the tawdry surroundings of a thousand million
every-day lives, into dazzling kingdoms of love.

Warren Jarvis felt the thrill, and he lost his humorous poise: the
heart-breaking seriousness of it all now came to his realization. How
he wanted to draw her to him, forgetting all the differences in
nativity, the social and political conditions which separated them so
insufferably!

Back in New York she had been to him as any other sweet, well-bred
girl; but here, in the Land of the Middle Ages, there were centuries
between them.

He wished to touch her hand, and yet so deep was his reverence--not for
her family position, but for her own proud poise of soul--that he
stifled his desire and dropped his eyes, ashamed of his own weakness!

The girl divined his thoughts better than he realized.

She had stepped upon the low platform at the base of the stairs, and
thus her face was on a level with his.

"Oh, Mr. Jarvis--you are brave, so brave! I never can tell you how you
have sustained me, in my fears and grief. I can never let you realize
how gallant I believe you to be for what you are doing to-night for my
sake."

Jarvis shook his head in deprecation.

"Are we not merely honest traders, your Highness? We made a compact,
risking your life at the start to save mine. Now, is the completion--when
I find your brother and solve the mystery of the fortune, I will know
that our account is squared. Then, I may be--_human_!"

Her eyes dropped before his own ardent answer, and she turned to the
stairs.

"I must go get the memorandum and the locket."

"Yes, of course? Where is it? You should have guarded that well."

"It is safe in my room, Mr. Jarvis,--I won't be long," and up the steps
she fled as though trying to escape from her own heart, in some
strange, new, yet not unpleasant panic.

"Rusty! Oh, Rusty!" called Warren. "Bring down my hat and coat, and the
extra tinware."

The voice of the negro answered, choked and muffled in a mystifying
way.

"Yassir! Yassir!"

"What are you doing up there? Hurry; we're starting."

"Yassir!"

Jarvis turned and walked toward the window, looking up at the dismal
silhouette of the ancient castle. The moon had risen, on the edge of
the horizon, and already the place was beginning to look ghostlike with
the pale iridescence.

"I wouldn't change places," he soliloquized between efforts to light a
fresh cigarette, "with that darned old spook ... that she thinks is in
that castle ... for all the gold that she thinks is in that cussed old
castle ... and all the rest of the motheaten castles in Spain!"

Rusty came down the stairs, his jaws working, and his cheeks puffing
vigorously.

Jarvis spun around nervously at the sound. He was keyed up this
evening, despite the humorous resolution which had straightened the
lines of that amiable mouth.

"What have you been doing, Rusty? What's in your mouth?" he demanded
impatiently.

"Yassir ... I mean, no, sir! I was jest slippin' a little snack dat
young lady bring up to me. I was so hungry I could jest feel my
stommick slippin' through my suspenders an' climbin' up my backbone on
de other side.... Um, yum--an' some Spanish po'k-chop, at dat!"

He rolled his eyes in ecstasy and licked his lips.

"But it warn't near enough!"

Just then Jarvis heard a scream, from the elevation of the balcony. The
Princess was calling, frantically.

"Mr. ... Warren ... Mr. Warren Jarvis!"

He darted toward the steps, and met her half-way up them, as she ran
down, her face ghastly with fear.

"What is it? Tell me?"

"Oh ... Mr. Warren...."

"Yes, yes!"

"The locket...."

"The locket is gone?"

"Yes," and this was very weak.

"And the memorandum?"

"Gone, too!" she gasped.

Jarvis called to Rusty, interrupting the finish of the running meal.

"Quick, Rusty--the horses!"

"The hosses, boss? whar is dey?"

"Outside! Go get the girths tight. Have you got that extra supply of
cannon?"

"Yassir! I'll go. I got enough to fight de Spanish War over agin. An'
dis time I'm goin' up San Juan Hill myself."

"Shut up, and get out--do what I tell you."

He turned to her nervously, but the battle-light was in the blue eyes
this time.

"Your Highness," and she stopped on the step above, "I've struck the
first trail of the spook that is haunting your castle; he made a
mistake by poaching on other preserves!"

The girl ran her hand through her hair, excitedly, bewildered.

"What do you mean?"

"Have you any idea of who could take it?"

"Why--no! I hid it in the corner of my grip, and was sure no one could
find it."

Jarvis laughed grimly.

"Your castle ghost is no slouch at finding things. He is no ignoramus,
either, for he must be able to read and write and understand geography
to get any good out of that memorandum. Does it give the exact details
of the treasure trove?"

"As plain as ABC!" she answered.

"You think...?"

"Yes, I've been thinking ever since you first told me the story. Now
I'm going to load my revolver with those thoughts, and earn the title
of my profession. Time is everything. I take the northern road, don't
I?"

"Yes, and the second turn to the right, through a broken wall."

"Yes, you've told me all this a dozen times before. But it's life and
death, and I want to make sure. What then?"

"That road leads to the postern gate at the top of the hill," she
added.

The outer door had opened softly.

Its position, sheltered under the long sweep of the old balcony, was
out of their immediate view.

They had been speaking in rapid English, but the man who slouched
noiselessly through the entrance, toward the arch under the stairs,
surmised the gist of the conversation.

He drew a revolver, well hidden in the shadow, and waited.

"I understand. I have my bearings, too."

Warren stepped down, to the level of the floor.

"Wait," said Maria Theresa softly. "This little cross--it is a token
which I wish my knight to wear in the tourney--to-night!"

She slipped the golden chain, and the simple religious emblem, over his
head and about his neck, with a movement which was a wireless touchless
caress.

"Only for to-night?" asked the Kentuckian, as he looked squarely into
the crimson face above him;--how the roses and lilies played
hide-and-seek beneath the soft skin of those clear features!

"You may never see to-morrow," she murmured, and she drew up the cross,
from its pendent position, pressing it to her red lips with reverence.

The American spirit cried out within for honest self-expression.

"Then, if I never see to-morrow, forgive me for telling you to-night
that I love you."

She would have spoken, but he raised his hand for silence.

Beneath the archway the shadowed figure drew nearer, slipping into the
sharp angle behind the stairs.

"Do not rebuke me to-night--wait until to-morrow--if to-morrow ever
comes!"

He paused, and still she was silent--except for the soft music of her
breathing--that regal bosom so close to his own upturned face!

"And now your humble vassal goes forth in his liege-lady's name and
cause, and, while all Seguro waits, Ghost and Ghost Breaker shall stalk
those haunted, melancholy halls!"

Again they looked into each other's eyes.

"Your Highness, within the hour I shall hang the signal of victory
within the window of the castle!"

He carried her hand to his lips, even as he had done on the memorable
night so far across the waters. But this time the fingers were burning,
and the slim flower of a hand was not drawn away!

"God be with you!" she answered softly, and crossed herself. The
Kentuckian watched her silently, a thousand mad thoughts whirling
behind the calm and resolute brow. She slowly ascended the stairs and
returned to her room.

He murmured tenderly under his breath:

"Highness ... Highness ... now, I understand how titles fit!"

A new noise came to his ears, and he listened without a tremor or
movement of his body.

It was the click of a revolver cock!

The Kentuckian knew this sound too well to be deceived. Slowly he
turned about, toward the large table on which stood the solitary oil
lamp of the room.

He began to unfold his overcoat, which had been hanging over his left
arm. Then he started whistling the first rippling bars of that good old
Southern battle-song "Dixie."

Slowly he walked toward the lamp, apparently examining his overcoat.

The man drew out from the shelter of the arch, and the revolver was
pointed straight at his back.

Suddenly the overcoat flew from the American's hands, covering and
extinguishing the glass lamp, which fell with a crash in the darkness.

There was a portentous pause--it seemed hours; its length was the bare
fraction of a second.

Two shots rang out, and scurrying feet were the only indication of life
within the room. Another shot sent its tongue of blood-thirsty flame
into the black void. There was a groan of anguish.

Then footsteps advanced to the door.

The cheery tune of "Dixie" was continued in the moonlight!




XVI

AS IN DAYS OF OLD


"Rusty! You lazy coon! Get on that horse of yours and hike along to the
castle. See--the moon is helping us!"

"Yassir. I was jest finishin' another hunk of po'k-chops dat I forgot
an' put in my pocket. Won't you have a bite?"

"No. I want to eat up something worse than pork to-night," and Jarvis
swung into the saddle with the lithe skill acquired from childhood days
on the backs of Blue-Grass thoroughbreds.

"What was dat gun-play, Marse Warren?" asked Rusty, after he had
calculated that they had ridden a respectful distance for inquiries.
Rusty had a certain inherited pride!

Jarvis laughed, and the dull glow of his cigarette tip was discernible.

"Oh, Rusty, why worry over history? Leave that sort of thing to these
'spigotties'--that's all they have to think about over here. It was
just a question of being 'pinked' or 'pinking' a certain gentleman who
was working beyond union hours."

"Huh!" snorted Rusty. "I'll bet de razor I has in my jeans dat he was
moh red dan pink when you-all got finished wid dat cannon o' yourn,
Marse Warren. It runs in de fambly ter shoot straight!"

"Well, Rusty, let's ride straight for a while. We must go up this road
to the turn."

They passed dark cottages, and finally reached the fateful angle of the
road. Rusty groaned apprehensively.

"Say, Marse Warren, I wouldn't mind dis all in de meanest moonshine
district in Kaintuck, but I don't like for to ride in dis yere foreign
district. W'y didn't you-all pick out some place w'ere dey speaks
human talk, instead of dis on-Christian lingo? It don't seem releegious
to me, Marse Warren."

"Rusty, I'm beginning to think you've got a yellow streak in you, with
all this talk about objections. You used to have a name for not even
being afraid of your weight in wildcats," said Warren.

Rusty nodded, as he clung tightly to the saddle, on the increasingly
rough trail.

"Marse Warren, dat was right. But wildcats is purty heavy, an' you-all
can hit 'em with a shotgun. De trouble wid ghosts is dat dey don't
weigh nuffin!"

"Lookout, Rusty. Here's a brook," and suddenly Jarvis' horse stumbled
to its feet, after sliding down a sharp declivity which had been hidden
by the shadows of the big moonlit trees. Rusty was not so
fortunate,--he was rolled off despite his efforts, to receive a
ducking.

Then did his teeth have reason to chatter, as he mounted again to
follow his master up the declivity with dripping clothes.

"Whaffor dey want a crick like dat just below de doors of a castle,
Marse Warren?" he complained.

"That's how they got their water supply--I wouldn't be surprised if the
old place weren't built right on top of that spring. You know when this
place was built they didn't have any faucets or taps in these old
places.--Except on the heads!"

They mounted higher, ever higher, swinging on their saddlebows the
unlighted, antique lanterns. Rusty was unmistakably becoming more and
more nervous.

The road took a sharp turn to the right now, and they clattered over
the wooden bridge of the moat.

They faced the great doorway of the old castle now. In the moonlight it
was an eerie sight indeed. The castle stood on a broad rocky shelf. A
cold wind swept over the mountain top, rattling the naked branches near
by the dismal walls.

"Ooooh!"

"What's that?" grunted Rusty in terror.

"Just the wind trying to get out through those barred windows up there,
you fool."

"Laws-a-massy, I don't blame it fer gittin' out. I wish I wasn't goin'
in."

A lone cloud took this occasion to cover the moon, and the shadow
darkened the outlines of the sinister structure. The castle, so Warren
had judged on his trip up the hill, must have been built in the period
of the Spanish Moors. Later, perhaps when the Moors had been driven out
of the country, two dismal wings, several towers and turrets had been
added, reminding one of the castles on the Rhine cliffs.

The face of the structure, which Jarvis scanned quickly, was about two
hundred feet long and maybe sixty feet high--with two stanch square
towers at either end.

Thin slits in the walls and two round windows high up appeared to the
mind of the Kentuckian (humorous in the face of the unknown danger) as
"architectural bungholes." On either side of the great arched door
jutted a turret, slit with many smaller openings and possessing
castellated tops.

As they rumbled over the planking of the open drawbridge Rusty's
chattering teeth were audible to the rider close at his side, and
Jarvis muttered angrily, drawing up his horse by the gate which led to
the inner courtyard.

"If you're still too much of a coward to go on, you can ride back,
Rusty. This is the first time you've ever failed me in a time of
danger."

The negro remonstrated nervously.

"I'm not skeered--Marse Warren, I'm jes' gittin' straight hair fer de
fust time in my life. I'm goin' wid you. I'ze jes' mighty onhappy."

A doorway somewhere swung shut with an iron clang. Rusty's nerves were
stronger now. He breathed hard but said nothing.

"They used to hitch their horses here, I suppose," said Jarvis, as he
slid from the saddle. The moonlight gave them a better illumination by
this time. He hitched his horse, and Rusty followed his example with
trembling fingers.

"Now, light the lamps. My, but those lamps would sell for a fortune in
a Fourth Avenue antique shop!"

Rusty obeyed silently.

Then followed the most horrible experience of Rusty's life, in what
seemed an endless exploration. They trod along weirdly echoing
corridors, through spacious chambers, where ancient tapestries hung
from the walls, while strange _d√©bris_ lay about amidst the curious
carved furniture. Everything was covered by a pall of dust. Squealing
and scurrying, the shining eyes and ghastly noises betrayed the
presence of myriad rats.

"What can they find to live on?" wondered Warren.

From the high battlements they peered into the valley, and could see a
few faint lights in the distant inn. Warren felt sure that one of those
lights was in the room of her Highness.

They explored the bedchambers of the lords and ladies of the castle,
the little pigeonholes in which the men-at-arms must have slept.
Strange subtle odors met them like an actual presence as they peered
into dungeons, stone chambers, and horrid vaults.

"I don't even see why a ghost would want ter hang around dis misserable
place, Marse Warren," ventured Rusty, as for the second time they
entered the largest room of all, within the central keep.

"We've been here before, Rusty," replied Warren, sitting down for a
moment on an old bench. Rusty looked around with rolling eyes.

Suddenly Jarvis jumped up and sniffed.

"Yes, and someone else has been here before. Do you smell that, Rusty?"

"Marse Warren, I'm so skeered dat I can't smell nuthin',--I can' see
nuthin', hear nuthin'--except dem moans and yowls in all dose powerful
big rooms we was in."

"The room's full of smoke and the smell of oil." Jarvis walked about,
to make certain. "Somebody's been carrying a smoky lantern. We're
getting warmer with that ghost."

A dull thud came to their ears, from far within the building. Rusty
jumped like a frightened fawn.

"Good godelmity! What's dat?"

Jarvis quietly walked across the room, to peer into the big stone
fireplace.

"Oh, Marse Warren, I want to go home!"

Rusty had turned about, and his eyes took in two figures of ancient
armor at the top of the broad half-flight of stairs, on a balcony da√Øs.
He sank upon his knees and bobbed his head to the floor in obeisance.

"What's the matter?" and Jarvis whirled about, with revolver drawn. His
own nerves were beginning to get too taut, with the tension exaggerated
by the superstition and fright of the negro.

"Look! Look! Look at dem big black boogies standin' dere, Marse Warren.
See 'em standin' dere?"

Jarvis laughed and put his gun into his side pocket.

"They're the same black things that scared you before, don't you
remember?"

"Oh, I'm so skeered, boss, dat I can't remember nuthin' at all."

"Get up on your pins--they're nothing but old suits of armor, and
you're liable to get some moonlight through you, Rusty, if there's
another rear-end collision like that. You've been treading on my heels
every step I take, and when I stop you bump into me."

"But Marse Warren," pleaded the frightened darky, "I'm powerful 'fraid
I might lose you!"

"A fine chance," snorted Jarvis, looking about. "Well, Rusty, we've
been through this old place pretty thoroughly, and not a sign of a
soul--unless they pound or carry a smoky lantern. It's a clew, Rusty,
it's a clew. We'll stick right here until we find out. This is the best
room of the castle, and the ghost may prefer it."

Jarvis crossed to the fireplace again, and striking a match, held it
into the opening. Its flicker indicated a good draught.

"There, Rusty," he said. "It's a good chance for a fire. The chimney's
clear. Now break up that lopsided, rickety table there and make a fire.
You won't feel half so scared with a good blaze behind you."

He turned toward the half-flight of stairs, with a studious expression
as he mentally measured the heights and thickness of the walls and
ceiling.

"I'll scout around a bit, Rusty."

"Don't you do scoutin' outsiden dis room."

Rusty crossed to the fireplace, with the pieces of easily-smashed table
legs, and began to light the fire.

"This was probably the banquet hall, Rusty."

"Yes, and say, Marse Warren, when we-all goin' ter eat?"

"When we get through with this job." He turned thoughtfully toward the
big windows on the south of the room, and mused aloud: "That's the way
through the two long rooms to the postern gate. Umm."

"That's where that black thing followed me."

"Yes, and a black thing followed me, walking on my heels every step I
took. I couldn't see where I was stepping."

"That goes to the armory."

"I seen eyes in dere and a cold grimy, green smell in dere. Ain't dat
where dat broad-faced bird flew at me, an' I slipped down de stairs?"

"Don't you know an owl, Rusty? That's all it was."

Jarvis was walking across the room to another door. Rusty was close
behind him, following by habit now.

"I wonder if that door is...."

He did not finish the sentence! His foot had touched a swiveled rock,
so delicately balanced that he had noiselessly fallen half through the
large opening in the rock floor when Rusty caught him by the collar and
under the arm.

[Illustration: _Rusty caught him by the arm_]

"Here, I'm holding on now better, Rusty. Give me your hand." They both
tugged, and he was soon safe, peering into the black opening together.

"That was a close call. Give me that lantern, Rusty!"

He dropped an old pewter cup, left on a side table, down the opening.
There was a delayed, faint splash.

"Lord!--water and a long drop. No wonder people disappear in this
castle. Great Scott! What if her brother fell in there? Rusty, whatever
happens, keep clear of this. Get me a burned stick, and I'll mark a
cross on it, so we can tell--it makes me nervous to see that open mouth
of death gaping for us. If you step on this you'll never see Kentucky
again, for sure."

Rusty obeyed.

"Did you hear that groan, Marse Warren?"

"Groan--that's the wind!... There it is again--it does sound like a
moan."

"Ough!" and Rusty's teeth chattered in perfect rhythm with his shaking
knees. "Ough!"

"Shut up! Listen ... I guess it's the wind, at that. But this place is
getting on our nerves all right."

Rusty controlled his teeth enough to talk now.

"Marse Warren, dat warn't no wind. Ah hope to die if dat warn't a shore
'nuff human groan." He turned and looked toward the big oil portrait of
an ancient Spanish hidalgo over the fireplace. "An' I wants to tell you
somepin else. Has you ever been in church or somew'ere an' all of a
suddent a feelin' comes over you dat dere's someone's eyes a-starin' at
de back of your haid ... you jest knowed it--until you couldn't stand
it no longer, an' jest had to turn 'round an' see who it was?"

"Yes, Rusty, I've had that. Why?"

"Dat's jest de way I feel now. Like dem eyes in dat picture was
a-lookin right through me. Like he'd like to step right outen de frame.
Or dem two boogie battleship men would like to jump right down on me,"
and he pointed toward the two suits of armor on the landing above.

"It's been a good many hundred years since those boys jumped. But
listen--there's someone running as sure as you're alive, Rusty."

It was unmistakable. The steps came nearer and nearer, and then came a
repetition of that dull thud in a distant room.

"I want to go home," moaned Rusty.

Jarvis had drawn his revolver again, and he was standing close to the
stairs.

"Great Scott, Rusty! The man with the smoky lantern has been up these
stairs. There are oil drippings, still fresh."

"You-all ain't going up, is you?" pleaded Rusty.

"Not at all. Because this Mr. Ghost or some of his spooky friends are
probably waiting at the top of the stairs with a long gun, and I'm no
book hero."

"Suppose it might be dat dere Mrs. Princess'es brother?"

"Well, he might blow my head off because he doesn't know what I came
here for, and if it's someone else they'd blow it off because they do
know why I'm here. There's somebody trying to scare us, Rusty. They're
probably watching every move we make.... That's where that pounding
comes from--why don't they shoot?... They're trying to scare us as they
did the poor boobs down in the village."

Rusty crossed toward the fireplace. He picked up an old mallet and
chisel from the mantel, which was brighter now from the fire. He cried
out in surprise:

"Look yere, Marse Warren. Look yere!"

He handed the tools over to the astounded Jarvis. "I found 'em on dat
mantelpiece!"

Jarvis ran to the mantelpiece and clambered up on a chair, holding the
lantern close to the wall.

"Good boy, Rusty! These are the Ghost's tools, all right. Someone was
working in this room--but we've beaten him to it.... Mortar on the
floor ... mortar on the mantle!... Look here at these stones. That's
where he was working, Rusty, and we've beaten him to it."

He stopped, and both of them turned simultaneously to look at the big
picture of the historical Spaniard. Rusty had drawn his own revolver,
with Jarvis doing the same by a curious instinct.

"Did you feel dat, too, Marse Warren?" asked the frightened negro.

Jarvis said nothing. He went to the picture and, lighting a match,
passed it all around the frame, examining it, without the discovery of
a suspicious thing. He turned away, then faced it once more as he
backed toward the low balustrade of the steps over which stood one of
the suits of armor.

"By George, that's weird. You could feel that just as plain...."

Rusty was still looking with fascination at the picture.

"It sure is, Marse Warren, it sure is...." He turned slowly, facing
Warren Jarvis. He had just time for one piercing howl--a veritable
high-pitched scream:

"_My Gawd, look out!_"




XVII

CONCLUSION


Rusty had dived under the table.

The great sword of the armored figure was swinging swiftly up in air,
and Jarvis leaped with all the sinewy strength of his young manhood.

It was none too soon.

The great Damascus blade struck fire from the stone balustrade where he
sat a second before.

Jarvis spun about, and his automatic barked. With the instinct of the
born fighting man he fired for the heart: this was his error.

The bullets spattered off the angle-braced breastplate.

Down the steps came the horrid figure, raising the great sword again.
The leaden shower did not halt the clanging monster, as the iron-clad
advanced.

He remembered now that Rusty had two more revolvers--but Rusty was
scuttling on hands and knees for the shelter of the turret entrance
across the room.

In desperation Jarvis threw his revolver at the head of the assailant!
It was a futile pebble toss.

The weapon clattered against the metal vizor and bounced off, as the
weird assailant ran within striking distance. For the first time in his
life came the sensation of helplessness in a fight. There was a numbing
feeling of horror as he recoiled before this thing.

His back touched the stone wall, just as the quick figure made a
forward step and struck again. The sword rang out against the rock, but
the hand that held that weapon knew how to wield it with determination.

Jarvis had dropped to his knees, and imitated Rusty's escape, until he
was out of reach. He might have grappled--but the thought came too
late. He saw the ancient weapons on the wall--there was a great poleax.

This was the instrument made for the man-at-arms to withstand the noble
knight in the days of old. He whirled it on high as the other came
toward him. The double-edged sword rose high to parry the stroke, and
the sharp weapon clove through the rotten wood helve: Time had disarmed
the American again.

A deep-chested laugh came from the human "battleship."

Warren laughed back--in the face of death: the old Jarvis fighting
laugh was a tradition in Kentucky.

His next weapon was a chair. With this as a guard he managed to swing
the sword with a clever parry. He gave the metal breastplate a vigorous
high kick. From the helmet there came a muffled "Oooof!" Here was one
"point" for the modern!

[Illustration: _His next weapon was a chair_]

Thus they dodged and feinted, striking, whirling, while the Kentuckian
planned his campaign.

Little by little he drew his implacable opponent toward the charcoal
cross-mark on the floor. The great sword rose high--he feigned weakness
and dropped his chair. Then, as the toreador dodges the mad onslaught
of the maddened bull, he leaped aside and the sword struck the ground.

Before it could be raised, he swung from his side position, with the
heavy antique chair, against the vizor. The equilibrium of the armored
man was none too stable, as he missed his stroke--and his head went
back. Again the Kentuckian charged, this time with a barehanded clinch,
the chair dropped.

Around the metal waist his arms went and he forced the other back but
half a foot.

It was enough!

"_Santa Madre!_" came from the helmet, as the figure stumbled through
the opening trap-stone.

There was a scream, which suddenly ended at highest pitch--a splash ...
then _silence_.

Jarvis staggered back, with dilated eyes upon the fatal hole--he wiped
the cold beads off his clammy brow, and staggered toward the table for
support.

Rusty's head came out from the shelter of the stone coping--and he
smiled an ashen imitation of amusement.

"Whar's yoh friend, Marse Warren?"

Jarvis' head was low upon his breast, as he answered quietly:
"Water--and a long drop! There's a real ghost due to haunt castle now,
Rusty."

"I knowed them battleship boogies was spooks!"

Warren picked up the great sword which had fallen by the trap as the
man went through. He walked up the stairs.

"Oh, Marse Warren, don't!"

"What's the matter?" and he snarled it. "Do I scare you?"

"You can't scare me--I'm scared already!"

Jarvis made a fencing feint at the other figure. There was no response;
again he tried. Then he rushed it, and knocked the armor over.

"I guess he's genuine--and harmless."

"Oh, Marse Warren, you'se got gall, shore. I'll jest finish dis
battleship--so he won't jump no moh." He had grabbed the armor and
started toward the trapdoor. "I'm goin' to sink him in de harbor!"

"Don't do that--it takes a thief to catch a thief. I'll make a ghost
out of you, Rusty. Come here."

Objecting, timorous, and still overcome with his native superstition,
Rusty was nevertheless forced to don the armor--a sad misfit he was, at
that.

"Somebody was working in this room, Rusty. It's a cinch that the
treasure was here. It's a cinch that we interrupted, and it's still in
its little safe-deposit vault. It's a greater cinch that if we go out
he'll come back. I want to have you stand up there where the other
battleship was, and watch. You'll be as safe as a church in this. No
one would think of looking for one of us in this armor--so when he
starts to work, whoever he is, you just yell and yell your best."

"Gawd, Marse Warren, I could yell loud 'nuff for 'em to hear me back in
Kaintucky."

"You give me your best yell, and I'll nail him."

"Ef you don't nail him, he'll nail me."

"Keep cool--that's all."

"I'm cool now--I'm ketchin' cold." And he sneezed.

"If you sneeze again, I'm going to use a gun on you. Here, give me one
of those two guns you have. And whatever you do, don't sneeze. I'm
catching cold myself here--anyone would in this musty old hole."

He pocketed the weapon and ordered Rusty to his place.

There came another sound--a repetition of the earlier faint sound. He
turned quickly, and Princess Maria Theresa of Aragon rushed into the
room, followed by Dolores.

"Thank God you are safe, Mr. Warren! I heard the shooting, down in the
other court of the castle."

"Where have you been? Why didn't you wait for my signal? The hour is
not over yet."

"We've been wandering through this dreadful place an eternity--trying
to find you, calling everywhere, so that we could reach you before it
was too late--before something happened that had always happened
before!"

Dolores had seated herself at the side table, and her face was buried
in her hands. She was sobbing.

"Too late? What do you mean? This is madness for you to take this
risk."

The girl, forgetting royalty and convention, caught his hand in both of
hers, and a light of joy came into her eyes.

"My brother is safe, thank God! He is on his way to the King to get
soldiers to search the castle."

"Where has he been? How do you know?"

"He was imprisoned in this castle--since the day he entered. To-night
he tried to signal, but could not. Your bullet went straight home, Mr.
Warren, and Robledo is dying. He has confessed all to the holy father.
I must go back, for I promised to be with him at the end."

"The end ..." and Jarvis' voice grew husky, he understood by now the
tears of Dolores. He turned toward her gently. "I'm so sorry--you and
he--I might have--oh, what a terrible shame!"

The girl crossed herself, with the stoic calmness of her religion, as
she rose to face him.

"It is better so. He sinned--grievously, many times, se√±or. My Prince
is safe ... my Princess is safe. And you are safe--you, the bravest man
in Seguro."

Maria Theresa turned toward the door, where stood a man whom Jarvis had
not espied before. "Take her back to the inn, Maximo, as quietly as
possible. Then send the chauffeur for me again as soon as he can come
up the rough road."

"But, your Highness, you must go back as well--it is dangerous for you
to remain here. I have found the clews for which you went to America.
Let me finish the job."

"No, I will stay with you."

He caught her hands, and looked down into the dark eyes, so wondrously
upturned to his.

"You must come by the fire, and get warm.... Here, sit in this chair.
You have been frightened to death, prowling through this horrid
place.... Your hands are icy.... There, there! Go on and cry--forget
that you're a Princess and be a real girl. Cry all you want! That's
fine!"

He took off his coat and wrapped it around her shoulders as she sat by
the flaming remnants of the old table.

He turned about and beckoned to Rusty, who with a revolver in hand, his
courage restored in a way by the turn of events, disappeared from view.
Jarvis gently placed a hand upon the heaving shoulder.

"I'll round up this spook to-night for good and all. Then the vassal's
task is done. His fate is in your hands, Highness; what's to become of
him?... Don't send me away. I loved you from the first--not like a
vassal either--and will always love you.

"I know I'm just a plain American citizen ... and a _man_. All the man
in me cries out, 'I love you!' Don't send me away."

"You must go. You must leave Spain, for your life would never be safe
here: you know what feuds are, and you have started one."

Just then an audible, unmistakable, common-place sneeze interrupted
this most wonderful of all conversations.

Jarvis looked about. The sneeze was in the room.

"Rusty, are you outside?"

"Yassir. But don't keep me here long, 'kase I'ze freezing to death."

"Did you sneeze?"

"No, sir; but I calc'late I'll have to befoh long."

"Don't move, your Highness--I've found the Ghost at last!"

He walked toward the suspicious picture, and pointed the revolver at
it.

"There is somebody in that picture. Come out or I'll shoot. Quick now!"

There was no response.

He sent a bullet, carefully aimed at the upper lefthand corner, where
he planned that it would do no harm.

There was a response.

"Don't shoot!"

[Illustration: "_Don't shoot!_"]

And the canvas opened neatly, to permit the elegant but dusty figure of
Carlos Hernando, Duke of Alva, to step to the mantelpiece and leap
clumsily to the floor.

The Princess had sprung to her feet.

"Your Excellency, you are a long way from Madrid!"

The Duke, brushing off his sleeves, snarled back: "You fool, you've
stepped right into the trap. I knew you were after the treasure."

"Oh, no, your man-at-arms did that, and if you try to lie yourself out
of this ... if it weren't for your cousin, I'd blow your damned head
off! Then I'd throw you down after the other poor devil--you've got a
lot of souls to answer for. See here, give me that locket--no, give her
that locket, or by the living God, I'll break your ... Come on now!"

"Carlos!" and the girl held out a stiff arm. The Duke fumbled in an
inner pocket, and dropped the memorandum into her hand.

"I told you all ghosts were cowards."

The Duke looked insolently into Jarvis' face, yet there was an
undisguised admiration for the stanch nerves of his opponent. At heart,
despite his criminal, conceited weaknesses, the Duke had thoroughbred
blood beating and pulsing through the veins.

"You play a good game, Mr. Warren.... Are all Americans like you?"

"They all play the game in Kentucky," snapped Jarvis.

"And I thought all Americans were fools." He crossed to the door. "I
think, my dear Maria, that for the sake of the family name it would do
my health good to take a trip to Monte Carlo and the Riviera--even
Egypt might help. Mr. Warren, take her advice and return to Kentucky."

He walked up the steps and smiled back with his cynical appreciation of
the situation, a medi√¶val sport to the end, as Jarvis realized.

"Hey, Rusty, you just follow that Duke as well as you did me. See him
out of the castle and on his way rejoicing. And don't let your finger
slip on that revolver."

"Yassir--wid pleasure, sir."

The footsteps died away, and Jarvis looked at the Princess.

She smiled back at him.

"What kind of a place is Kentucky?"

"God's country, lady.... Must I go back alone, your Highness?"

She put her hands upon the tired shoulders, and looked up with the
ineffable look which passeth all understanding, except between the one
man and the one woman. She held her lips up to him!

"Warren--don't call me Highness!... my name is Maria!"


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ghost Breaker, by 
Charles Goddard and Paul Dickey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GHOST BREAKER ***

***** This file should be named 25781-8.txt or 25781-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/8/25781/

Produced by K Nordquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
