The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stoker's Catechism, by W. J. Connor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Stoker's Catechism

Author: W. J. Connor

Release Date: January 27, 2008 [EBook #24441]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOKER'S CATECHISM ***




Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE STOKER'S CATECHISM




                  THE

           STOKER'S CATECHISM


                   BY

              W. J. CONNOR.


                [Device]


                London:
 E. & F. N. SPON, LIMITED, 57 HAYMARKET
               New York:
 SPON & CHAMBERLAIN, 123 LIBERTY STREET
                  1906




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings have been retained. The oe ligature is shown as [oe].




PREFACE.


There is no trade or calling that a working man is more handicapped in
than that of a Steam Boiler Stoker; there are no books on stoking; the
man leaving his situation is not anxious to communicate with the man who
is taking his place anything that might help or instruct him; and the
new man will be shy of asking for information for fear of being thought
incapable for the post he is seeking; and the transfer takes place
almost in silence, and the new man has to find out all the ways and
means at his own risk, sometimes at his employer's expense.

My object is to instruct that man in his business without his knowing
it, or hurting his very sensitive opinion on stoking and other matters;
for I am well aware that it is only the least experienced who are the
hardest to convince, or instruct--against their will. I have therefore
ventured to devise this simple method of question and answer, which I
have named "The Stoker's Catechism," which I hope may instruct and
interest him.

I will not encumber this preface with my personal qualifications for
this little work--the answers to the questions might suffice.

                                                    W. J. C.




THE STOKER'S CATECHISM.


1. _Question._--How would you proceed to get steam up in a boiler?

_Answer._--Having filled the boiler with water to the usual height, that
is to say, about four inches over the crown of the fire-tube, I throw in
several shovelfuls of coal or coke towards the bridge, left and right,
keeping the centre clear; then I place the firewood in the centre, throw
some coals on it, light up, and shut the door. Then I open the
side-gauge cocks to allow the heated air to escape, and keep them open
till all the air has cleared out and steam taken the place of it; by
this time the fire will require more fuel, and when the steam is high
enough I connect her by opening the stop-valve a little at a time till
it is wide open and ready for work.


2. _Question._--Supposing there are boilers working on each side of the
one you got steam up in, how would you act?

_Answer._--I would light the fire by putting in a few shovelfuls of live
coal from one of them instead of using firewood; that is all the
difference I would make.


3. _Question._--What is the cause of the rapid motion of the water in
the gauge-glass at times? Is that motion general throughout the boiler?

_Answer._--No; air enters the boiler with the feed-water, and the
gauge-glass tube being in the vicinity of the incoming water, some of
the air enters the glass and flies up rapidly through the top cock and
into the boiler again; in fact there is very little motion of the water
in the boiler at any time while working. I have proved this to be so,
and in this manner: the boiler cleaners having finished the cleaning,
hurriedly scrambled out of the boiler and left several tools they had
been using on the crown of the fire-box, namely, a bass hand brush, a
tin can, and a tin candlestick, and a small iron pail; the manhole cover
was put on and boiler filled and put to work before the things were
thought of, and then it was too late and they had to remain there until
the next cleaning time, which was thirteen weeks; and when the boiler
was at last blown out and the manhole cover removed, the things were on
the crown of the fire-box exactly as they were left three months
previously. In order to satisfy myself of this, to me, extraordinary
discovery, I placed several articles on the crown of the fire-box,
things that could not stop up the blow-off pipe if they were swept off,
and got up steam as usual, and after three months' hard steaming I blew
out the water and steam, took off the manhole cover, and there were the
things as I had left them thirteen weeks previously; of course they were
all coated with fine mud, but no signs of having moved a hair's breadth.


4. _Question._--But water in an open caldron with a fire under it, as in
the steam boiler, will madly sweep the sides and bottom with terrific
ebullition. How would you account for the great agitation in the open
caldron while the steam boiler had hardly any, although both vessels had
fierce fires under them?

_Answer._--In the matter of the open caldron the action of the water has
no resistance but that of the atmosphere, whereas in the steam boiler
the movement of the water is resisted from the moment it is heated, for
then a vapour rises above it, and, as the heat increases, the resistance
to the movement of the water is proportionally increased, and as the
heat of the steam increases the pressure on the water increases
proportionally all through, the steam being above the water. Any old
stoker knows that when getting steam up in a boiler the lower parts are
often only warm when there may be eight or ten lb. on the square inch in
the upper portions; when the water begins to boil the steam rises in the
form of minute globular particles, and remains above the water until
there is an outlet for it by opening the stop-valve or through the
safety-valve; and as the pressure is the same throughout every part,
nook and corner, and angle, there can be no dominating force to cause
any agitation within the boiler.


5. _Question._--What is superheated steam, and why is it used?

_Answer._--If a boiler is placed at a long distance from the engine or
whatever the steam may be used for, there is much or little condensation
according to the distance and the weather, so that there would always be
water mixing with the steam, and that is most objectionable where a
steam engine is concerned, and by super-heating the steam it comes to
the engine as hot and dry as if the boiler were close by; but whatever
the heat of the steam may be, the pressure cannot be increased after the
steam has left the boiler. In proportion to the pressure of steam so is
the heat of it; the higher the pressure the hotter the steam.


6. _Question._--If your water gauge-glass broke while the boiler was
working, how would you proceed to rectify the mishap?

_Answer._--By immediately shutting off both cocks, the water-cock first,
then I would open the blow-out cock (at the bottom of the gauge-glass)
and keep it open to the finish, and commence unscrewing the nuts,
clearing them of any bits of india-rubber that adhered to them, also the
sockets. Get one of the half dozen glasses already cut, and my string of
rubber rings, enter two rings on the bottom end of the glass, slip the
nut over them, slip two rings on the top part of the glass after having
slipped the nut on, and enter the rings in the sockets, then screw up
both top and bottom nuts by hand alternately, and when screwed up
evenly, open the steam cock a shade to warm the glass, and when it is
hot enough, open it more and commence closing the blow-out cock, by
tapping it lightly by hand, then open the steam cock a little more and
open the water cock a little also, and shut off the blow-out cock, and
presently the water enters the glass, and both top and bottom cocks may
now be opened to their full extent, and the job is done.


7. _Question._--How would you cut a water gauge-glass to the proper
length?

_Answer._--I usually cut a piece of iron wire the length the glass
should be, in this way: I measure the length from under the top nut to
the top of the bottom nut, and cut my iron wire to that measurement;
then I cut several glasses in my spare time, instead of doing it when
the glass breaks. I mark a circle where I wish to cut the glass, and
with a three-corner file I run it round this circle to a depth of the
16th of an inch, and break it off on the edge of the vice, bench, or
other solid woodwork; of course this iron-wire gauge will perhaps only
answer for this particular boiler, but in some stoke-hold the boilers
are all alike with regard to the gauge-glasses.


8. _Question._--What is the cause of a vacuum in a boiler? And how does
it affect her injuriously?

_Answer._--The vacuum is mostly caused by letting cold water into a hot
boiler, the hotter the boiler the stronger the vacuum; when the water is
hotter than the boiler, there will be little vacuum; a strong vacuum in
the boiler will cause the air outside to press on the boiler in
proportion--the stronger the vacuum inside, the greater the pressure
outside. In this circumstance the pressure is misplaced for the boiler
was constructed to bear an internal pressure and not an external
pressure. And in getting steam up the pressure on the boiler has to be
reversed, and this tends to loosen the plates and rivets and makes her
leak, if she never leaked before. I have frequently known boilers to be
filled with water over-night to be ready for lighting up in the morning,
and have found the gauge-glass empty; this puzzled me at first, but on
opening the blow-out cock of the water-gauge the air rushed into it with
a gurgling noise, then I knew there was water in the boiler held up by
the vacuum, but I soon altered that by opening the side-cocks, and
letting air into her which soon killed the vacuum, and down came the
water into the glass again to the proper level. When getting steam up, I
always open one of the side gauge cocks and keep it open until steam
issues from it; that permits the foul air to escape and prevents a
vacuum being created; there used to be a vacuum valve in the vicinity of
the steam dome, that opened inwards and prevented a vacuum from being
created.


9. _Question._--If you had only one boiler and one engine at work, how
would you manage to clean your one fire without letting the steam go
down?

_Answer._--When pushed for steam, which usually occurs when the fire is
getting dirty, I get ready all the tools and some of the best of the
coals, and having a bright fire I take the long poker and skim all the
fire to one side and throw a couple of shovelfuls of coals evenly over
it and rake out all the clinkers on the opposite side, then with the
long poker (some people call it Kennedy) I skim all the fire over to the
opposite side and throw a couple of shovelfuls of coals evenly over the
bright fire, and rake out the clinkers on the other side, then I spread
the fire evenly over the bars and sprinkle some more coals over all, and
shut the door. This performance from first to last need not take more
than ten minutes, and the boiler was making steam all the time, and at
the finish I had a better fire than at the beginning, and the steam
hardly lost a pound; but the job must be done quickly.


10. _Question._--What is the cause of the humming noise that issues from
a steam boiler at times, and how would you prevent it?

_Answer._--It is caused chiefly through bad stoking, in having an uneven
fire, full of holes, or crooked bars, the cold air rushing through where
there is the least resistance, and into the tubes, causes the humming
noise--a locomotive nearing home after her day's work has very little
fire on the bars and will generally hum, so there is some excuse for
her, but none for a stationary boiler. Some stokers take credit to
themselves for making the boiler "Hum"; when coals are thrown into the
fire indiscriminately--small and large--the air finds the least
resistance through the small coals, which soon burst into holes, while
the lumps remain solid; then the air rushes into the holes and the
humming commences; or, if the firebars are not equally separated, the
air enters the widest space and the boiler hums; or it may be that the
bars next the side of the fireplace are out of line and lets the air
rush up against the side and the boiler hums. If the stoker would only
drop a shovelful of coals dexterously into each hole the humming would
stop immediately, or level the fire with the rake or long poker, or open
the fire door if the rake is too heavy, and the noise will cease. The
chief point is to have a good set of firebars and well placed; if they
are too long they will hump in the middle or they will bulge sideways;
if they are too close together they become red-hot because there is not
room enough for the air to pass between them to keep them moderately
cool, and if they are too short they will drop down into the ash-pit.


11. _Question._--Why is it more difficult to keep steam-tight the
manhole cover of a portable boiler than the manhole cover of a
stationary boiler?

_Answer._--The portable cover is usually on the side of the boiler, and
about half the cover is immersed in the water and half in the steam; the
portion under water is about 212° of heat, the portion of the same cover
in the steam is about 500° of heat, the hottest part expanding much more
than the cooler part, and is constantly tending to tear itself away from
the lower portion of the cover, and the joint cannot stand the unequal
strain. The manhole cover of a stationary boiler is nearly always on top
of the boiler, and the heat is equal all over it and no contraction and
expansion to cause the joint to leak as in the portable cover.


12. _Question._--How would you prepare a boiler for the inspection of a
boiler inspector?

_Answer._--I would blow her right out, take off the manhole cover, take
out the safety valve, take out all firebars and the bridge, take down
flue-port brickwork, have the boiler and flues thoroughly cleaned and
swept, have a lamp or candle ready to light, a hand hammer and chisel,
or scraper, a pailful of clean water, and a wad of cotton waste. When
the inspector arrives, he quickly dons his overalls; I hand him the
light and the tools and waste, and he is into the fireplace in a jiffy;
down the side flues, under the boiler, giving a whack with the hammer
now and then, and scraping off any suspicious scale, etc.; and when he
comes out, as black as any sweep, he slips out of the overalls, gives
them a whack against the wall, folds them up tight, and crams them into
the black bag; has a dive in the pail, and is soon ready to go off
somewhere else. But he tells me something about the boiler before he
goes--not to my discredit.


13. _Question._--How do you proceed to get her to work again, and what
materials do you use?

_Answer._--I first proceed to build the bridge and flue-ports, put in
the firebars, the thin bars at the sides; then I replace the
safety-valve, taking care not to damage it or its seat, fill the boiler
with clean water, put in the boiler the usual quantity of Naenaires
Anti-Corrosion liquid, or the powder, make the manhole joint with
plaited three-strand spun yarn and stiff putty (red lead and white lead)
and lay the fire, which is done in this way: throw a dozen shovelfuls of
coals towards the bridge, and to left and right of it till they reach
near to the dead-plate, leaving the centre clear for the firewood; then
throw in three or four shovelfuls of coals over the wood, with oily
waste or paper in front, and she is ready for lighting, and the "fire
is laid." The material for the bridge and the flue ports are firebricks
and fireclay; these are rather expensive, but I learnt a wrinkle in the
building up of bridge and flues. Through the frequent removals of these
for boiler inspection and the hitting of the end of the long poker,
several bricks were broken every three months, and I came to the
decision to try stock bricks faced with fireclay as mortar; and I was
more than satisfied with the result, and ever since then I used stock
bricks and fireclay only.


14. _Question._--How high should the top of the bridge be from the crown
of the boiler or from the fire-tube?

_Answer._--The bridge should be about nine inches from the crown of the
fire-tube, if it were eight the draught would be curtailed, if it were
ten the draught under the bars would be diminished, through much air
passing over the bridge instead of under the firebars. As I had
permission from my employers to build the bridge to the best advantage
for myself in keeping up the steam, and having tried different heights
for many years, I found that nine inches was the nearest to perfection.
And in these experiments two additional bridges were built in one
boiler; six feet behind the ordinary bridge was a concave bridge and six
feet behind that was a convex bridge. The concave bridge was built
close up to the bottom of the fire-tube, and resembled a small archway,
and extended down to within nine inches of the bottom or shell of the
fireplace; the convex bridge was built on the bottom of the shell and
reached to within nine inches of the fire-tube. When the flame from the
furnace shot over the ordinary bridge, it clashed down under the concave
bridge, then rose up and swept through the convex bridge and away to the
bottom flues; the object of these three bridges, in one tube and for one
fire, was to keep the flame and heat in the boiler as long as possible,
instead of the heat flying swiftly over the bridge and out of the
boiler. This experiment seemed to answer very well, but as there were
several other boilers connected with this one there was no opportunity
of testing it correctly, but the three bridges remained established, and
were frequently shown to engineers and others.


15. _Question._--What advantage is there in having the blow-off pipe of
a boiler entering it from the top instead of at the bottom?

_Answer._--I am not aware of any advantage in it, but I am aware of a
disadvantage in it, and it is this, that while the boiler is being blown
right out for the purpose of cleaning, or other reasons, the stoker will
often commence doing some other work, and in due course the boiler is
filled up with water, and the fire lighted, and by-and-by the stoker
comes to see what progress she is making; he looks at the water-gauge
but sees no water in it because it has syphoned out of the boiler; at
first the heated air pressed on the water and forced it through the
blow-off pipe, and then the pipe became a syphon, and the pressure
increasing as the water leaves the boiler, she is soon emptied, and if
the fire is not raked out, soon burnt. Such a mishap could not happen to
a boiler with the blow-off pipe at the bottom, for when the stoker blows
out his boiler he must shut the cock before he can fill her, and when
filled there is no chance of the water escaping out again.


16. _Question._--Is there not some disadvantage in having the blow-out
cock at the bottom of the boiler?

_Answer._--Yes; the cock and pipe are subject to corrosion on account of
water dripping down on them from the stoke-hold floor, as some stokers
quench their clinkers and ashes while they are up against the front of
the boiler, instead of drawing them forward a few inches from the front:
and as the pipe is out of sight under the plates of the floor, nobody
takes the trouble to lift them and examine--not only the pipe and the
cock, but that part of the boiler where the water streams down from the
drenched ashes so frequently. So there are disadvantages in both methods
of blowing out the boiler, and always will be, until the stoker learns
his business, and takes an interest in his work, not only for his own
sake, but his employer's also.


17. _Question._--What is the most important appendage to a steam boiler?

_Answer._--The safety-valve, but it is not always a safety-valve, when
it is weighted to twice the amount the boiler is certified to be worked
at safely. As an instance: Amongst the many engines employed at the
Midland Extension Works, St. Pancras, was a light steam crane for
hoisting earth from the deep excavations, there were in use small wooden
skips, and the pressure of steam was forty-five lb.; but after a time
there arrived large iron skips that the crane could not lift, even when
empty; there were about twenty men depending on the crane for their work
and the navvy-ganger was anxious for "something to be done," and the
crane man hinted about weighting the safety-valve, and no sooner said
than almost done; the safety spring balance was screwed down, and a
railway chair suspended from it by strong copper wire, and the steam
allowed to rise until it reached ninety lb. on the inch, and the big
iron skips were hoisted with their load of heavy ballast as easily as
the wooden ones had been. The boiler _happened_ to stand it.


18. _Question._--Have you any other instance?

_Answer._--Yes; in an establishment in Hammersmith some years ago, the
stoker was in the habit of putting a bit of iron on the end of the
horizontal lever of a safety valve when the steam rose too high, and the
manager was about, and when it went down he would take off the bit of
iron and put it where he could find it for the next occasion. The
manager had gone away one day, and advantage was taken of it to have a
little carouse in which most of the men took a part; and when the steam
rose the stoker popped his bit of iron on the lever and all was quiet
for a time, when another noisy safety-valve began to blow off, and on
went another bit of iron that stopped the noise, and during all this
time the fires of seven or eight boilers were burning fiercely, and the
stoker should have checked his fires instead of what he had done; but in
the midst of the carouse all the boilers began to belch forth steam when
the manager came on the scene. The stoker tried to pick off the bits of
iron before the manager could see them, but the steam was to high for
that; and when at last the noise subsided and the steam had cleared
away, the whole of the revellers were on view, caught in a trap, as
there was only one exit. Most of the men were fined or suspended, the
bits of iron were discovered on the levers, and the stoker had a week's
notice to clear out, and lock-up valves were fitted on every boiler and
the keys kept in the manager's desk ever after.


19. _Question._--Can you always depend on the safety-valve lifting when
the steam rises?

_Answer._--I always keep an eye on the pressure gauge, and if I find
that the safety-valve does not lift at the pressure it ought to lift at
I know that the valve is sticking, and I lift the lever and let the
steam out; the cause of the sticking may be that the valve has worn down
in its seat and becomes conical, or there may be a shoulder on the valve
that would cause it to stick, or it may be that the lever and fulcrum
were smeared with oily dirty waste in the process of cleaning and not
wiped off, but left to bake between the parts, which would prevent the
free action of the safety valve.


20. _Question._--Why is the safety-valve lifted at times, especially
when getting steam up?

_Answer._--It is often done by old stokers as well as new ones, and is
more of a silly habit than of trying the pressure of the steam,
especially as there is nowadays a pressure gauge for every boiler in a
stoke-hold. By lifting the safety-valve while steam is in the boiler and
dropping it down again is a dangerous practice; there is a rush of steam
to the valve when lifted, and when it drops the rush of steam is
instantly stopped, and rebounds like an india-rubber ball hit against
the wall, and this commotion within the boiler is likely to blow the
stop-valve to pieces or the manhole cover off. Besides that, there is
always dust floating on the surface of the water, especially in a boiler
just cleaned, and when the valve is lifted the dust is carried up with
the steam, and when the valve is dropped the dust is caught under it and
often causes the valve to leak.


21. _Question._--When the water in the gauge-glass appears motionless
while the boiler is working, what does it portend, and how would you
proceed to rectify the stagnation of the water?

_Answer._--It portends that the passage for the water is choked and
requires clearing, and I would lose no time in commencing to rectify the
stoppage; as a stoker who is responsible for the safety of the boiler I
am always prepared for emergencies. I commence by shutting both cocks of
the glass, the steam and the water, and unscrew the small bolt in the
water gauge, which is fixed there for the purpose of clearing the tube
that conveys the water to the glass, and with an iron wire in one hand,
I open the water cock with the other hand, and push the wire into the
small hole from which I took the bolt, giving several pushes and pulls
while the water and steam are flying out, until the tube is quite clear;
then I withdraw the wire, shut the cock, and serve the steam cock in
like manner; and while I was doing all this the bottom cock of the gauge
(the blow-out cock) was open from the beginning. Then I commence to put
the pressure on the glass by warming it with steam from the top cock
slowly; then I open the water cock a little, and so on, alternately;
then I commence shutting the blow-out cock a little. By these
man[oe]uvres the pressure on the glass is put on gradually instead of
popping it on too suddenly and breaking the glass, as is often done by
the _more-haste-the-less-speed_ stoker; now I shut the bottom cock and
open the other two, and the water bounds into the glass quite frisky,
and the boiler is safe for the present.


22. _Question._--What would be the consequence if the steam cock of the
water gauge was choked, while the water cock was clear, or vice versa?

_Answer._--The consequence would be most serious for the boiler, as the
water would be forced up into the glass by the steam under it, and would
make it appear as if too much water was in the boiler, and the stoker
would proceed in the usual way to blow out some of this, apparently,
surplus water; and then watch to see it come down to the working level
in the glass, but he watches in vain--it will never come down. He might
empty the boiler dry, and the water in the glass will be there as long
as a breath of steam remains in the boiler to keep it up. And in the
event of the water-cock being choked while the steam-cock was clear the
consequence would be equally dangerous, for the water that was in the
glass before the stoppage occurred would remain in it, for the stoppage
would not allow it to drop down into the boiler again; so there it would
remain, and when the stoker came round to look at his boiler, unless he
happened to notice that no movement of the water was visible, he would
pass on without further ado, and remain in total ignorance of his
danger. Hence the necessity for the stoker to blow out his water gauge
every time he comes in front of his boiler, and if the water enters the
glass in a sluggish or dilatory way the cocks need to be cleared of the
partial stoppage, and let the water enter the glass with a rush.


23. _Question._--Could a boiler collapse without affecting the fusible
plug?

_Answer._--Yes; the tank that supplied the boiler with water leaked
badly, and to stop the leaks a quantity of fine oatmeal was mixed with
water and poured into it, and in due time reached the boiler; but
instead of the oatmeal permeating the whole of the water in the boiler,
it never got beyond the parts surrounding the fireplace; it stuck on the
sides and top thickly, and was baked hard on them. After a few days the
sides of the fire-tube bulged inwards nearly twelve inches, and the
boiler had to be stopped and blown out, and the fusible plug was found
to be unaffected--it was one selected by a Boiler Insurance Company, who
had to repair this damage, and the stoker was exonerated from blame, but
there is little doubt that if the plug had leaked the mishap would have
been attributed to shortness of water and the stoker would be blamed for
what he did not do, and get the sack into the bargain.


24. _Question._--Why is it that an injector can force water into a
boiler from which the steam comes to work the injector at a greater
pressure than is in the boiler?

_Answer._--The secret of the working of the injector is due to the
velocity of the steam issuing from the point of a conical tube, and
water issuing from another conical tube somewhat larger than the steam
cone, and a partial vacuum created in the barrel by the steam and cold
water meeting--as both cones face each other. The cones are about four
inches long, one and a quarter inch wide at the mouths, and about one
half of an inch at the points. The suction pipe, steam pipe and delivery
pipe are about one inch diameter, and the overflow pipe half an inch
diameter, and the water tank three feet below the level of the injector,
the space within the barrel might be twelve square inches; the water and
steam cocks are supposed to be always open, and this is how the injector
is started working. The water-wheel is turned partly round, and a
figured disc behind it indicates the quantity of water let into the
barrel, while the steam is let in by turning a wheel attached to a
quick-screw spindle; then there are ructions inside--the steam and water
have come together, and the water overflows through the half-inch pipe;
but by a little manipulation of the water, air will soon start it
working; then the overflow ceases, and the air rushes into the pipe and
hums, and the injector is working. And the reason of its working is, in
my humble opinion, the concentration of water and steam, with the vacuum
thrown in, that gives additional pressure to the water in the injector.
I might venture to say it gives fully ten lb. on the square inch over
and above the pressure of steam within the boiler.


25. _Question._--The noise created by the injector while working being
very objectionable, could it be mitigated? And, if so, how?

_Answer._--Yes; I succeeded in quieting an injector in one establishment
where anything louder than the scratching of a goose-quill was
considered a nuisance. I first began by putting a piece of paper against
the mouth of the overflow pipe while the injector was working, and the
noise ceased, but soon after that the paper was sucked up into the
injector. I then applied a leathern disc, which answered well, and
proved just the right thing; sometimes the water blurted out, but not
often, and the leathern disc was permanently established; but the
injector would not work with water above 100 degrees of heat; so I would
start with cold water and gradually turn on the hot water and shut off
the cold, and she never noticed the change, but the noise was stopped.


26. _Question._--How would you quiet a noisy pump--one of those stuck up
in a corner of the stoke-hold that can be heard, but not often seen?

_Answer._--I had one of them once--a very good little "Manchester Donkey
Pump," but as noisy as they make 'em--and it became a question whether
she should be discarded for an injector; she was bolted to a wall in the
basement of a block of offices and could be heard throughout the
building, and my employer told me that he would willingly give a 5_l._
note to anyone who would stop the noise. The donkey was vertical; I took
off both valve covers and drilled a 3/8-inch hole in each projection
from the cover that gave the valve its lift, and drove a wooden peg into
each hole from the under side, and rasped them down to give the required
lift, and put the covers on again and started the donkey, and after some
more raspings of the plugs I started her again, and this time was
successful; she worked like india-rubber, no noise whatever, and I
gained more than was offered to quiet her--a cheque of 21_l._ This
happened in Draper's Gardens, Throgmorton Avenue, E.C.


27. _Question._--When several boilers are working in a row, and one of
the middle ones has to be cleaned, what would you do to keep it cool
enough to enable the men to do the cleaning, and also to protect them
while in the boiler?

_Answer._--Having blown her right out I would take off the wheel of the
stop-valve spindle, tie a piece of canvas on the top of the spindle and
lock the wheel up, so that no one should open the stop-valve while the
men were in the boiler. Many dreadful things have happened through some
thoughtless or meddlesome idiot opening the stop-valve while men were
working in the boiler. I also cover the blow-off cocks of the boilers in
steam, as there is usually a pipe into which the steam and water is
carried off running parallel with the cocks, and take charge of the
spanner used in opening them, in case an absent-minded stoker might
attempt to blow some of the muddy water out of his boiler when the men
were in the empty one, and scald them to death, the steam rushing up
through the blow-off. I then fill the boiler up with cold water several
times, and allow cold water to play into the boiler from the manhole by
means of the hose pipe, and the blow-off cock being open there is always
a cool atmosphere for the men to work in; they can remain longer in the
boiler, do twice the amount of work, and in less time than in a
scorching atmosphere. When the cleaning is done and the boiler rinsed
out, I shut the blow-off cock and fill her with clean water to the usual
height; take off the canvas on the spindle, replace the wheel, and the
boiler is ready for lighting up the fire.


28. _Question._--Does familiarity with one's work as stoker sometimes
lead to carelessness and then to mishaps? And, if so, give an instance?

_Answer._--Yes; familiarity in doing things frequently during work,
tends to a careless off-hand style of self-importance that has often
caused trouble and mishap. A crane driver employed at the Midland
Railway Extension at St. Pancras, came to work one winter's morning and
the steam being already up, turned it on to warm the steam chest and
cylinder, preparatory to commencing work for the day, forgetting that it
had been freezing hard all night, and split the steam chest to pieces.
His plea of defence was that steam had remained in the chest and
condensed, and become ice, then expanding, burst the steam chest; this
plea served all right, but the following summer he was less successful.
He came to me during the dinner hour and said, "Jack, I can't get any
water into my boiler, will you come over and look at her?" I did go
over, and on looking at the water gauge saw it was empty, opened the
cocks, but dry steam came forth, opened the fire door and found a bright
fire of coke; while the engine was pegging away to get water into the
boiler. I said, "Bill, stop your engine and draw your fire at once, and
my name's Walker." I went back quicker than I came; and an hour later
he came over to me looking very down, and said, "Jack, I've done it." I
knew what he meant and went over with him to look at the boiler. It was
as complete wreck, and I told him to fly off and get any money that was
owing him before he got locked up; he did go, and I never saw him since.
This man was an engine fitter before he took to engine driving--poor
fellow, I was very sorry for him. Another instance. A stoker had to fill
a boiler and get up steam in her one Sunday morning, there was a big
tank over the stoke-hold from which water was taken to fill cold
boilers, a two-inch pipe with stop-cock led to the top of each boiler
from the bottom of the tank. But the tank was empty on this occasion; a
donkey pump close by was used to keep the tank filled, but this boiler
was the one from which the donkey took her steam, and was now empty, but
the stoker solved the puzzle: a boiler with steam was in use about fifty
yards away, and having a steam-pipe connection to the empty one he
opened the cock and commenced letting the steam into her, but it was
condensing as fast as it went in; and being one of the extra clever
ones, he lighted a fire in the grate so as to stop the condensing, and
did stop it, and let in sufficient steam to work the donkey-pump and
partly filled the tank, and was proceeding to open the two-inch cold
water pipe when one of the workmen passing by saw some cotton waste
smoking strongly on top of the boiler, which induced him to open the
furnace door, and he saw that the boiler was red-hot and collapsed; he
rushed up to the stoker who had his hand already on the stop-cock to let
water into her when he was forcibly pulled away from it, much against
his will, but when he saw the damage he had caused he sheered off and we
saw no more of him. This case occurred at the London Hydro-Carbon Oil
Works, Southall, W. One more: On a Sunday morning a stoker came in to
break the joint of a manhole, empty the boiler and fill her up again
with water. After taking the dogs off and securing the cover from
falling into the boiler, the stoker gave the cover a tap with the end of
the spanner to loosen the joint, but the cover showed no signs of
slackening, and the end of a crowbar was requisitioned but without
result; and in this case, as in a former one, my opinion was solicited
as well as help. I used the crowbar end harder every blow; when at last
the cover seemed to spring downwards and upwards, I dropped the bar
instantly, thinking the devil had a hold of the cover. After a moment's
thought I went down into the stoke-hold and opened one of the gauge
cocks and steam rushed out; there were no pressure gauges in this
establishment; every one of the twenty boilers had eight weights
suspended from the lever of the safety-valve, each weight representing
five lb. pressure. I took off the weights one by one, and when five of
them had been removed steam began to blow off, showing that fifteen lb.
pressure was in the boiler while I was trying to knock the manhole cover
in. On inquiry it transpired that the man whose duty it was to blow out
this boiler the previous day asked his mate to do it, and the mate
forgot all about it (it being Saturday night), and these omissions
nearly caused a catastrophe. This occurred in Pimlico, S.W.


29. _Question._--What advantage to the employer is the self-acting
stoker for steam boilers?

_Answer._--He can use the very cheapest and smallest coals; the cold air
is never permitted to enter the boiler; there is no cleaning out fires
with the door wide open; the steam is more uniform in pressure; the
boiler will last longer, and little or no smoke. There is a drawback to
these advantages: there must be a live stoker to keep the automatic
stoker up to its work; he has to keep the coals supplied to the "Jacob's
Ladder"; he has to regulate the supply of coals to the boxes over each
boiler, and regulate the supply of coals dropping down into the
fireplace, regulate the speed of the travelling furnace by means of the
ratchet, clean out the ash-hole of clinkers every two hours and wheel
them out of the stoke-hold, regulate the water-supply to the boilers,
and keep the steam at the proper pressure, and rectify any and every
derangement and mishap that occurs to the self acting stoker.


30. _Question._--But are not these "self-acting stokers" smoke consumers
as well?

_Answer._--The self-acting stokers have to be kept working by the live
stoker, and are smoke consumers so long as the coals let down on the
travelling furnace is exactly proportionate to the requirements of it,
but if the supply should exceed what is necessary, the grate becomes
choked with coals and has to be cleared of some of them, and in doing
this with coals partly burnt, smoke is inevitable; and if the supply is
insufficient, the grate becomes bare of fuel, and cold air finds its way
through the bars and checks the steam. To remedy this, the coal is let
down and carried onward by the moving grate before they can be ignited,
and soon begin to smoke, so that in these two extremes, too much or too
little coals will cause smoke; but if this type of furnace is in charge
of a competent stoker, there is little chance of the bars being choked
with coals, or starved for want of them.


31. _Question._--Is it not possible to consume the smoke of a boiler
furnace independent of patents and mechanical contrivances that can
only be worked by an experienced stoker?

_Answer._--I have proved it possible where several boilers were
connected and working, and using small and smoky coals. In an
establishment in West London the system in vogue was in this manner: all
the bridges were built hollow, and an iron flap covered the bottom of
the bridge, and a long iron rod from the flap was carried to the front
of the boiler, and an inch steam pipe with cock attached entered the
fireplace above the door, and was joined to a two-inch perforated pipe
that was fixed from left to right over and above the dead-plate. When
the fires required replenishing, the flap was opened, then the door and
steam cock, and six shovelfuls of coals were hastily thrown in evenly
over the fire, and the door was then shut. The result of this
performance was a mixture of steam and smoke observable at the chimney
top, the steam was kept on while any smoke was visible; then the next
boiler was served in like manner, and was a continual round of work to
the exclusion of other things. This method prevailed for many years
before I came on the scene, and noticing that a great quantity of steam
was wasted for the purpose of hiding the smoke, and the six shovelfuls
of coals hardly compensated for the steam spread over them, I induced
the man who built the bridges, after inspection, to build them solid,
and then I commenced a new method of firing, in this manner: I sprinkle
the small coals with water from a hose-pipe, and burn one fire down low,
but bright; I shut the damper nearly close and commence firing towards
the bridge and sides, until the grate is full nearly to the crown of the
fireplace, allowing the gas to remain in the furnace and flues for
twenty minutes, then I open the damper a couple of inches; by this time
there are numerous jets of flame flickering all over the coals, and now
I open the damper to the full extent and I soon have a rousing
steam-making fire. I serve the next low fire in like manner, and so on.
But it is necessary always while burning one fire down for the purpose
of banking it up, to have all the other fires in good condition and
capable of keeping up the steam independently of the one to be banked
up; if the others should burn down too low before one of them is banked,
smoke will follow the neglect. I remained several years in this employ;
my method was very successful, with proper care and watchfulness, and
was adopted in a similar establishment in South London. The former
establishment was the West Middlesex Water Works, and the latter the
Southwark and Vauxhall Water Works. One ton of Welsh coals was allowed
every twenty-four hours to get the seven fires up after cleaning. Here
is another method for consuming the smoke, but is a very wasteful one;
four or five shovelfuls of small smoky coals are thrown on or near the
dead-plate, where they remain until they become sufficiently heated to
ignite, and are then pushed on to the bars by the rake, and a similar
quantity again thrown on the dead-plate, and when ignited pushed on to
the bars as before, and so it is continued. It is expected that the
smoke while passing over the bright fire towards the bridge will be
ignited, but only a very small portion of it becomes flame, and the
smoke tends to deaden the bright fire to a great extent. The door has to
be opened so frequently in this method, and in pushing the coals from
the dead-plate to the bars a large amount of live fuel drops down into
the ash-pit, and if this should be thrown into the furnace again, the
fire is deadened immediately. There is no economy in this method, which
I tried years ago but never continued since.


32. _Question._--Is there any difference, and if so, what is it, in
locomotive and stationary boiler stoking?

_Answer._--There is a wide difference between the methods, not only of
firing but of the general work of the firemen and the stoker. (I cannot
see why one should be called stoker and the other fireman, for they
both have to keep the fire going and the steam up). The loco. fireman
had to be at the engine shed forty-five minutes, and the driver thirty
minutes, before the time of the train starting; the fireman gets the
stores necessary for the journey, such as oil, tallow, cotton waste,
yellow grease, and perhaps fog signals, gets his lamps from the lamp
room already trimmed--these are the head lamp, side lamp, water gauge
lamp, tail lamp and hand lamp; he places the head lamp on the right hand
side of the buffer plank, the side lamp on the left side of the tender,
the gauge lamp close to the glass, the tail lamp behind the tender; he
has to take his engine to be coaled (it used to be coke in my early days
on the L. & N. W. R.), and fills his tender with water, and brings his
engine over a pit, fills the axle-boxes of engine and tender; by this
time the driver shows up, and goes under the engine and thoroughly
examines every part of the gear; then he oils her, and both men sign on
for the particular train that the engine's number is in line with, and
run down the incline to Euston, where they hook on to their train and
wait. If it should turn out to be a particularly heavy train, the driver
will request the pilot-engine driver to hook on and go perhaps as far as
Tring or Wolverton with the train, otherwise the pilot will detach at
the top of the incline at Camden; if it should be a night train, with
the pilot in front, it is an experience never to be forgotten by a young
stoker. (I was not far in my teens when I had this experience, but an
old man now). And at last the signal is given us to start; we blow the
whistle and off we go, two engines panting, puffing, sending up showers
of sparks, and soon we leave Camden behind, and by the time we reach
Watford we are travelling about fifty miles an hour; this is the speed
to test the stoker who has to light his lamps the while, travel round
the foot-plate and keep his balance, and replenish his fire and climb
the tender frequently; but the passenger trains are a luxury in
comparison to the luggage trains. The luggage engines being bigger and
stronger than the passenger engine requires more steam and water,
because she has more than double the load to run with, and at the
stations wagons have to be shunted frequently and often re-shunted; some
are left and others taken to far-off places; the guard's van has to be
detached always in order to have it at the end of the train; the stoker
is hard at work with the brake putting it on and off, jumping down to
hold the points, or coupling wagons--this is not his business, but he
does it to facilitate the work. When the luggage train had to get into a
siding to let a passenger train go by, there was no pit (except at a
station) for the engine to stand over, and both men would have to crawl
under the engine to do anything necessary, through wet, or snow, or mud;
and when starting the engine out of the siding or from a station, and
the driving wheels slipping round, the stoker had to jump down with his
shovel and scrape up a bit of gravel, or sand, or clay, and pop it on
the rail in front of the driving wheel, and if that should stop the
slipping, the engine gave a bound forward and the stoker had to run to
keep up with the engine, throw his shovel on to the foot-plate, and
scramble up the best way he could, or be left behind. In bad weather, if
it rained, hailed, or snowed, both driver and stoker had to keep a
look-out by holding their hands up before their eyes and looking between
their fingers; when it rained, and one side of each man was wet through,
they would change places till the other side got wet through also. These
were the good old times. Drivers and firemen in the present time may
thank their stars that the way was well paved for them before they
started. So there is hardly any similarity between a stationary boiler
stoker and a locomotive stoker, except keeping the steam up perhaps; the
loco. stoker is the king of all stokers.


33. _Question._--How is the stoking done on a big steam ship?

_Answer._--In a Royal West Indian Mail Steam Packet, in which I was
stoker, there were forty-five stokers and coal trimmers, forty-five
sailors, besides a number of stewards, stewardesses, six engineers, six
ship's officers, several mail officials, butchers, bakers, and a brass
band of eighteen musicians. There were two stoke-holds, one fore and one
abaft the funnel, and four boilers in each, and four furnaces in each
boiler, and three stokers in each stoke-hold, also three trimmers in
each stoke-hold. There was the same method of working in both
stoke-holds, and a constant and continual round of firing kept up day
and night. When going down on watch I have a piece of waste in each hand
to protect them from the hot handrails; I commence work by cleaning the
small tubes of four furnaces, then clean out the four furnaces, rake out
the ashes from the pit and fill them and the clinkers into iron buckets,
which the sailors haul up and empty over the ship's side. And while I am
engaged in this work my two mates are doing my firing for me--which is
in this way: one man fires every other fire of the sixteen fires, then
goes round again and fires those he missed the first round, then his
mate takes the shovel from his hands and fires every other fire, then
fires those he missed the first round; the third man does likewise, and
so it is constant firing all through. And having towering hot boilers
both sides of us and roaring furnaces behind and in front, the sweat
pours from us continually, and we are glad to pop into the engine room
after firing to get a draught of somewhat cooler air. I happened to have
the middle watch--12 midnight to 4 a.m.--which is the worst of the
watches, for when I came off at four the hands on deck were always doing
something to make a noise, and there is little chance of getting a
sleep, and hammocks must be stowed away before eight; then breakfast,
and the brass band strikes up for half an hour; but if there had been
dog-watches all of us would share in the middle watch--as follows:--

    Brown       Morning    Watch     4 to  8 a.m.
    Jones       Forenoon     "       8 to 12 noon.
    Robinson    Afternoon    "      12 to  4 p.m.
    Brown       First Dog    "       4 to  6 p.m.
    Jones       Second Dog   "       6 to  8 p.m.
    Robinson    First        "       8 to 12 midnight.
    Brown       Middle       "      12 to  4 a.m.
    Jones       Morning      "       4 to  8 a.m. = 24 hours.

A few hours after leaving Southampton all hands are mustered and
apportioned to man the seventeen boats hanging from the davits, eight on
each side, and the captain's gig under the stern; after this ceremony we
get an allowance of grog. The fires are now beginning to be dirty,
having clinkers seven or eight inches thick, which are not allowed to be
pulled out until the whole fire is cleaned at the usual time; this
order from the chief engineer surprised me at the time, as clinkers are
not calculated to increase the steam, so I left them there to deaden the
fire, but later on I found the solution; I was told by an old stoker
that there was sharp competition between the chief engineers as to who
could do the voyage at the least expense of coals, and that information
explained the action of our chief engineer who would often perambulate
the deck till midnight, watching the windsails that they should remain
with their backs to the wind in order to prevent a breath of cool air
reaching the fires, that would cause them to burn a few more pounds of
coals, while some of the stokers were often hauled up in the ash-bucket
fainting from the stifling heat of the foul-smelling stoke-hold. We were
all supplied with fishing-lines and hooks of three different sizes, and
extra grog when getting steam up. The method of cleaning and polishing
the engines and all bright work was very effectual, and did the stokers
great credit; after having scoured and polished the steel and bright
ironwork they were frosted, in imitation of hoar frost. A pot of hot
tallow and white lead in which a clean piece of cotton waste was dipped,
and the parts smeared evenly in line with the metal, and when this dried
it was dabbed, or patted, with another clean piece of waste also dipped
in the hot tallow, which gave the metal a good imitation of hoar frost;
the brass and copper work were burnished and shone like gold. The boat
drill and fire drill create some wonder for the passengers, as they
always happen unexpectedly; the former begins in this way: a large gong
is rapidly hit with a mallet by the quartermaster, and all those stokers
and sailors, who belong to the seventeen boats hanging from the davits,
immediately make their way towards them and commence to clear the falls,
and the word is given to lower all boats, while the men hold their oars
ready to push off, and the boats are run down nearly to the water's
edge; then it is up all boats, and those on deck run them up in a jiffy
to their places under the davits, and coil the tails up, and this ends
the boat drill. The fire drill takes place on another day, and commences
in this manner: the ship's bell is rapidly rung by the quartermaster;
the unusual rapidity of the ringing attracts the attention of all the
passengers who commence to crowd the upper deck; the stokers drop down a
dozen hose-pipes on the deck and run them out straight, and screw them
to nozzles leading down to the engine room. The engineers pop the pumps
on and up comes the water; every hose is now stiffened and the branches
are all directed over the ship's side, where they make a grand display.
All those of the ship's company who take no watches, as cooks, stewards,
bandsmen, etc., have each a pail full of water in hand, others a
blanket over their arm, all in exact line, and ready to help if
required; and after a few minutes' display of the hose-pipes, the
boatswain's whistle ends this drill for this voyage, and the hose-pipes
are disconnected, rolled up, and hung up, to be ready at any moment if
required. There are plenty of amusements on board, such as single-stick,
glove-boxing, wrestling, etc. But the game of the "Man in the Chair," is
one of the most laughable. A piece of board, 12 inches by 18 inches, in
which a strong rope is inserted in a hole in each corner and knotted on
the underside, the four ropes are carried upwards and made fast to the
forestay, and the "chair" has to be 6 feet from the deck. There are
perhaps thirty stokers in this game, and each one has twisted his black
silk neckerchief into rope shape, and a volunteer sits on the chair,
holding on to one of the chair-ropes with one hand and in the other his
silken rope. During these preliminary tactics the passengers are
crowding round to see what may happen. At last the man on the chair
gives the word "Ready Boys," and then commences a real slogging match,
hitting the chairman on legs, arms, face, neck, anywhere they can hit
him, and every hit being a matter of chance the passengers roar when the
man in the chair delivers a stinger to his tormentors; his blows come
with double force, as he is high above them, and swinging round and
round, and to and fro, they come unexpectedly and cause roars of
laughter; while this is going on a little tub, called a spitkin, is
surreptitiously pushed in view, and a few silver coins dropped into it
by one of our men, which causes the audience to dip their hands in their
pockets and a few pounds in silver are quickly thrown in; and after half
an hour's play this game comes to an end. One more specimen of the many
games that delight the passengers: about twenty men stand close together
and in line, their faces to the ship's head, the front man has a bandage
on his eyes, any one in the rank is at liberty to step out and go up to
him and slap his cheek, and dart off to his place in the rank before the
blindfold touches him; if he does, the touched one has to don the
bandage, and the other pulls his bandage off and takes a place in the
rank. When the slap is delivered, the slapper darts back to his place in
the rank with all possible speed, and the slapped one darts after the
other like greased lightning, and touches the wrong man perhaps, and
pulls the bandage off, only to have to put on again, while the
passengers roar with delight; the little tub is not forgotten in this
game; and then the climax comes when we think the blindfold has had
enough of it, and when a burly stoker steps out to deliver his slap, the
rank closes up tightly, and on rushing back to his place with the
blindfold at his heels, and the wild exertions of the man to squeeze
himself into the rank before he is touched and the joy of the blindfold
who has just touched his man, creates loud cheers and laughter, and the
burly man has to don the bandage and take his stand in front. Before
arriving at St. Thomas, there is a general clean up, bilges pumped out,
engines cleaned, boiler fronts and lagging polished; the passengers are
preparing for another voyage to some of the islands further west, as
Trinidad, St. Vincent, Barbadoes, Martinique, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, etc.
On entering the harbour guns are fired in our honour, and we return the
compliment by firing our six-pounder from the forecastle, the Colonial
steamer comes alongside our ship, when there are cheers and waving of
handkerchiefs and handshaking; the bumboats come alongside also and many
people, and board our ship, offering us a great variety of things for
sale; women galavanting over every part soliciting the officers'
washing, etc., etc. Our engines receive a thorough overhaul, boilers are
cleaned, cabins and stairways painted, and all bright metal cleaned and
repolished; our coals are delivered on board by a swarm of men, women
and youths, of both sexes, carrying them in small wicker baskets on
their heads, and stepping on a scale or counter on their way to the
ship, the process occupying about three days for about 800 tons of Welsh
coal. At last the time has come for starting for home; all visitors are
ordered off the ship: moorings are cast off, and a man at the voice-pipe
speaks to the engineers down below, and the great paddle-wheels revolve
slowly for a minute, while the band strikes up some appropriate air, as
"Afloat on the Ocean my days gaily fly," or "Afloat on the Ocean Wave."
Then commence the wild cheering and waving of hats and handkerchiefs
while the great paddles have lashed the water into white foam, and we
are fairly off for a fourteen days' voyage home. In all our games on
board in which I took part I noticed the distinguished presence of our
highly respected captain, which I am sure greatly enhanced our takings
in the little dish.


34. _Question._--How is a hydraulic pump constructed?

_Answer._--There are various sizes, ranging from a 1/4-inch to 4 inches
in the diameter of the plunger or piston, as it is sometimes called; the
larger size would be constructed in this manner; the barrel of the pump
is 3 feet long, and on its top, and in line with it, and in the same
casting, an air chamber is situate into which water and air enter at
every suction of plunger, and serve as a buffer or cushion in the
delivery stroke. The spindle of the plunger is connected to the piston
of the steam engine by a hole and stuffing box in the cylinder cover,
and a connecting crosshead secures the spindle of the plunger and the
extra piston, so that would bring the crank of the engine, the
connecting rod, piston, extra piston, and plunger all in a straight
line, and a direct stroke. About 6 inches of the plunger is occupied by
the packing at the outer end; a solid ring of iron an inch wide, and an
inch high, and securely pinned to the plunger, has a leather cup pushed
on to it, then a loose ring is slid up against the back of the leather
cup and another cup, and another ring, until the space for the packing
is filled up; then a nut is screwed up behind these which brings cups
and rings tightly together, and a jam-nut with a split-pin going through
nut and spindle and opened wide enough to clear the sides of the barrel,
and the hydraulic pump is ready for work.


35. _Question._--How is a hydraulic accumulator constructed, and why is
it necessary?

_Answer._--By having an accumulator, a lift, crane, or press, works
smoothly, as there is a steady and smooth supply of the power; whereas
without it, the lift, crane, or press, would work in jerks or jumps;
with every stroke of the pumps there would be a jerk; it would be an
intermittent not a continual power. The accumulator consists of a
cylinder of cast iron about 9 feet in height, 4 feet outside diameter
and 3 feet internal diameter; it rests on massive oaken timbers about 4
feet from the ground; inside the cylinder is a ram 9 feet high, also 2
feet outside measurement, and 12 inches diameter inside; it is
lathe-turned, smooth and bright; four slabs of cast iron, each a quarter
of the circumference of the base of the cylinder, are placed over four
steel bolts that have to support the dead weight, each bolt being about
12 feet high, 4 inches in diameter, with square necks and flat heads,
and a hole in each slab to receive the bolts; the flat heads of the
bolts are to facilitate the accumulator resting level on the oaken
timbers; the slabs would be 2 tons each. On the slabs are fixed small
segments all round and round the base of the cylinder until the required
number (perhaps 150) is placed one on top of the other, each segment
weighing 2 cwt.; then the crosshead is placed over the top tier, and
having a hole in each of its four arms it is entered on the bolts which
have a screw-thread; the nuts are put on and screwed up tightly, and the
accumulator is erected.


36. _Question._--How is the accumulator started working?

_Answer._--The engines are started pumping into the ram and cylinder,
whose drain-cocks have previously been opened, and air and water issues
from them; when the air has escaped they are shut off, and then the
great mass of iron and steel begins to tremble and totter and moves
upwards and upwards, and on nearing the limit of its journey the top of
the accumulator lifts a projecting lever which has a small chain
attached to it, the bottom end of the chain is attached to the steam
throttle valve, and when the chain is pulled up at the top the steam is
shut off at the throttle-valve and the engine stops, but will start as
soon as any water is taken from the accumulator.


37. _Question._--Is there any similarity in terms used in hydraulic work
and steam boiler work?

_Answer._--There are several terms common to hydraulics and steam; the
steam boiler might be called an accumulator of power; there is a
slide-valve in hydraulics as in the steam engine, to admit the power and
to allow the exhaust to escape; there are stop-valves and intermediate
valves in hydraulics, as in steam pipes, also air-vessels in each: there
are suction and delivery pipes and valves in each, and relieve valves
also in each; there is a cylinder in each in which the power is
concentrated; there are reversing levers in a hydraulic crane, as in a
steam crane.


38. _Question._--Who invented the atmospheric engine, and how was it
constructed?

_Answer._--Savory, a mining agent, invented the first method, which he
called an engine, of drawing water up from a well by means of a vacuum
which he happened accidentally to discover a method to create, and the
pressure of the atmospheric combined with it. He procured a real steam
boiler with a safety valve and gauge cocks and erected two vessels in
which to create a vacuum; a suction pipe from the bottom of each vessel
led down into a well beneath the vessels, and a valve that opened
upwards was on the end of each pipe. When about to start work, steam
from the boiler was turned into one of the vessels, and kept on until it
was as hot as the boiler itself, while a drain cock was kept open the
while, and when air and water had been forced out of the vessel steam
was shut off, and water from a tank above the vessel was allowed to flow
on it, which soon made a vacuum inside the vessel, and water was sucked
up through the valves opening upwards and delivered into a tank placed
for the purpose. While this performance was in progress, the other
vessel was being charged with steam to repeat the performance, etc. This
is the extent as far as I know of Savory's claim to be the inventor of
the atmospheric engine.


39. _Question._--Who was the real inventor then?

_Answer._--Newcomen and his partner Cawly adopted a working beam, that
is, a beam working on a centre or trunnion. At one end of the beam was
the pump, at the other was an iron cylinder with an iron piston in it;
both ends of the beam were arched or sexton-shaped, and had a chain on
each, one connected to the pump rod, the other to the piston rod. When
about to start work, the piston being up near the top of the cylinder,
steam was let in under it and a jet of water was let in which soon
condensed the steam and created a vacuum within the cylinder, and the
piston was drawn down to the bottom and the pump drawn up with its load
of water; and a counter weight was attached to the pump-rod to always
bring the piston to the top of the cylinder after each descent. This is
a very brief description of this atmospheric engine; there were now only
two cocks to open and close--the steam cock and water cock, and the
engine only required a boy for this purpose, but the boy himself added a
share in this engine. In order to have a relief from the monotony of
opening and shutting the cocks alternately, he tied strings to the
handles and then connected to the working beam in such a manner that the
cocks were opened and closed exactly at the nick of time; this caused
the engine to work far more regularly and to do twice the work it had
done previously, the boy's name was Humphrey Potter.


40. _Question._--What did James Watt do in connection with the
atmospheric engine?

_Answer._--Watt being a mathematical instrument maker, was requested to
repair an old engine used by some students of Glasgow University; having
finished the repairs, and in working this model (the best type of the
atmospheric engine), he found and proved by many and various
experiments, that an enormous waste of fuel was absolutely necessary in
working the engine; he found great difficulty in keeping the air from
entering the cylinder, and the cylinder top was so exposed to the
atmosphere that the steam was much condensed when it entered the
cylinder, and he came to the conclusion to put a cover on the top of the
cylinder, and allow the piston-rod to play in a hole in the cover with a
gland and stuffing box, and _to press down the piston with steam instead
of the atmosphere_. This engine was no longer atmospheric, it was a real
steam engine, the first ever seen or constructed, for steam was used to
create the vacuum, and steam was used to work the piston; but this was
only the beginning of his great improvements. This engine though
suitable for the purpose of pumping water, was totally unsuitable for
continuous rotary motion, the steam acting only on the downward stroke
after the piston had been pulled up to the top of the cylinder by means
of the additional weight fixed on the pump end of the beam. He devised a
method to admit steam under the piston as well as above it, but the
flexible chains although suitable for the down stroke of the piston were
powerless in the up stroke, they would hang listless and useless. This
being so, he determined to get rid of the chains at both ends of the
beam, and also both arched ends, and substitute a ridged connection at
both ends of the beam. He put an iron connecting rod from the end of the
beam to the pump rod, and the other end of the beam was connected to the
piston rod by a crosshead; to this engine he attached that grand
appendage the "Parallel Motion" which is the pride of the beam engine up
to to-day. He devised the improvement of the separate condenser for the
exhaust steam, instead of the jet of water under the piston. He invented
the crank for his engine, also the sun and planet motion, also the
throttle valve, also the counter to indicate the number of revolutions
the engine had performed, also the "Cut off," the steam moving the
piston by expansion when it was cut off at one-third the length of the
cylinder, and thus saving two-thirds of the steam and a more uniform
rate of speed.


41. _Question._--Give a description of the Sun and Planet method, and
why he invented it?

_Answer._--The sun and planet were two cog-wheels geared into each
other, the sun being 3 feet diameter and the planet 2 feet diameter, the
latter was keyed tightly on the bottom end of the connecting rod, and
the sun which was keyed tightly on the end of the shaft, that was to
revolve and work the machinery. But although this method did make the
machinery revolve, it was not smoothly, for when the planet wheel was at
either top or bottom of the sun wheel, the power of the engine was less
effective than it was half way in the opposite positions. This led Watt
to add a large wheel on the shaft of the sun wheel, called the fly
wheel, which equalised the rate of motion to uniformity. Watt invented
the crank for his engine, but one of his men gave the tip to an engineer
at Bristol, who forthwith took out a patent for it and forestalled Watt,
who had to invent another means--the sun and planet. But when the term
of the patent expired, Watt resumed the crank method instead of the sun
and planet, which was noisy, the wear and tear very great, and also
expensive.


42. _Question._--What other things did Watt do towards the perfection of
the steam engine?

_Answer._--He added the air pump to his engine to draw the condensed
steam and water from his separate condenser; he invented the throttle
valve and the governor, in order to sustain a uniform rate of speed in
the engine, whatever pressure of steam might be on, or variation of
work, whether heavy or light.


43. _Question._--Why is the power of the engine called horse-power?

_Answer._--Before the invention of the engine, horses were employed in
mills and mines, and other places; the number of horses employed in a
mill or mine, indicating the amount of work going on, and the necessity
of employing them, and when the steam engine came on the scene, and a
purchaser wanted, he was told that the engine was equal to so many
horses; that comparison gave the purchaser a clear idea of the engine he
required. Savory was the first to suggest this comparison, but Watt knew
that horses differed in size and strength, and in order to be sure of a
safe standard for his engine power he experimented with big horses in
some London breweries, and after careful calculation and comparison he
fixed a horse-power at 32,000 lb., that is to say, that a horse could
lift that weight of water one foot above the ground in a minute for
eight hours per day. This standard has remained ever since, although it
is above the average of the power of the average horse, it is in favour
of the purchaser of an engine, as well as being capable of working more
than eight hours a day, or twenty hours if required.


44. _Question._--What is meant by "nominal horse-power"?

_Answer._--It is a rough and ready way of giving some idea of the power
of an engine or engines on the basis of the number of inches in the area
of the cylinder or cylinders, but when the process of taking the diagram
of the engine is gone through the term nominal is dropped, and indicated
horse-power is then expressed, because it was proved by actual
experiment and certainty.


45. _Question._--How is that performance accomplished?

_Answer._--In horizontal engines there are generally two gun-metal
screw-plugs on the top of the cylinder, one over each end and in front
of the piston; when a diagram is to be taken, these plugs are taken out
and other screws put in their places, to which a copper pipe is
attached; the screw plugs are 1 inch in diameter, also the copper pipes;
and exactly mid-way on the copper pipe is a small cylinder which moves
on a pivot, by means of a string with a turn round it. One end of the
string is fixed by a clip on the connecting rod, the other end anywhere
to keep the string tight, so that by the movement of the steam entering
the cylinder at either end, and the connecting rod working backwards and
forwards, the small cylinder is made to turn frontways and backways; and
within the small cylinder is another cylinder very much smaller; it has
a tiny piston within it, and as the steam presses on the little piston
at every stroke of the engine, a pencil from the outer cylinder is fixed
in a slot and marks the movements of the little piston on a roll of
prepared paper, slid over the inner cylinder for that purpose, the
pencil being kept up to the paper by means of a small steel spring. This
diagram on the paper cylinder, not only is used for determining the
power of the engine, but for detecting any irregularity in the
slide-valve movements. Every hour during the trial the finished diagram
is torn off the roll and a fresh one started, and when time is up the
engine is stopped and the diagrams compared. Then commence the
calculations, which are gone through somewhat in this manner: the common
multiplier is found by multiplying the area of the piston in inches by
the speed of the piston in feet per minute and the product divided by
32,000 (Watt's horse-power), then the effective mean pressure found on
the diagram is multiplied by the common multiplier, and the quotient
will be the _indicated_ horse-power of the engine.


46. _Question._--How is the consumption of coals apportioned to the
horse-power of the engine at the finish of the trial?

_Answer._--The consumption of coals in pounds is divided by the product
of the indicated horse-power and the time in hours. The quotient is the
quantity consumed per horse-power per hour.


47. _Question._--Would the quality of the coals used in the trial be of
the same quality as will be used in the ordinary working of the boiler
after the trial is ended?

_Answer._--No; the coals which are used in the trial are generally the
best Welsh, not shovelled up indiscriminately, but carefully
hand-picked, weighed and wheeled into the stoke-hold; the engine during
the trial is lavishly supplied with oils and tallow, with great
regularity. After the trial, and the horse-power is indicated, the
boiler resumes her ordinary work; the stoker is ever after expected to
create sufficient steam with very inferior coals to develop the same
amount of power in the engine as was done in the trial. I think that is
very unfair to the stoker.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let the finish give you pleasure" was the last headline in my last
school copybook in the long, long ago; and it has given me as much
pleasure to begin this catechism as to finish it; it has given me
pleasure to offer to brother stokers my very long experience in stoking,
and kindred vocations, such as hydraulics, steam-pipe joint making,
water-pipe joint making, engine driving, etc., in the hope that in the
perusal of this catechism they may find something to their advantage.
And with my best wishes for their future success, remain their true
friend.

                                                    W. J. C.

1906.

       *       *       *       *       *

        LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED
 GREAT WINDMILL STREET, W., AND DUKE STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stoker's Catechism, by W. J. Connor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOKER'S CATECHISM ***

***** This file should be named 24441-8.txt or 24441-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/4/4/24441/

Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
