The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pocket Island, by Charles Clark Munn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pocket Island
       A Story of Country Life in New England

Author: Charles Clark Munn

Release Date: December 8, 2006 [EBook #20057]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POCKET ISLAND ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                             OTHER BOOKS
                                 BY
                          CHARLES CLARK MUNN

UNCLE TERRY. A Story of the Maine Coast. Richly bound in crimson silk
cloth with gold and vignette of heroine. Illustrated by HELENA
HIGGINBOTHAM. Gilt top. 370 pp. Price, $1.50.

                     See description in back of book.

ROCKHAVEN. The Story of a Scheme. (In preparation. To be published in
the Spring of 1902.)

                     See announcement in back of book.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                             POCKET ISLAND

                _A Story of Country Life in New England_

                                   By

                           CHARLES CLARK MUNN

                Author of "Uncle Terry" and "Rockhaven"

   New York International Association of Newspapers and Authors 1901

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                 Copyright, 1901, by Charles Clark Munn

                          All Rights Reserved

                             POCKET ISLAND

                NORTH RIVER BINDERY PRINTERS AND BINDERS
                         NEW YORK CITY, N. Y.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS.

                     CHAPTER I.                    PAGE
Pocket Island                                        11

                     CHAPTER II.
The Sea Fox                                          18

                     CHAPTER III.
Nemesis                                              24

                     CHAPTER IV.
The Boy                                              31

                     CHAPTER V.
The Boy's First Party                                41

                     CHAPTER VI.
Serious Thoughts                                     49

                     CHAPTER VII.
Liddy                                                58

                     CHAPTER VIII.
The Husking-Bee                                      66

                     CHAPTER IX.
Good Advice                                          74

                     CHAPTER X.
History                                              82

                     CHAPTER XI
War Clouds                                           91

                     CHAPTER XII.
A Day in the Woods                                  100

                     CHAPTER XIII.
The Girl I Left Behind Me                           107

                     CHAPTER XIV.
Beside the Camp Fire                                117

                     CHAPTER XV.
Mysteries                                           125

                     CHAPTER XVI.
The Grasp of Death                                  132

                     CHAPTER XVII.
Those Who Wait                                      137

                     CHAPTER XVIII.
A Few Bright Days                                   146

                     CHAPTER XIX.
Among the Wounded                                   156

                     CHAPTER XX.
Plans for Happiness                                 164

                     CHAPTER XXI.
Blue Hill                                           174

                     CHAPTER XXII.
The Maine Coast                                     182

                     CHAPTER XXIII.
Big Spoon Island                                    191

                     CHAPTER XXIV.
Pocket Island                                       199

                     CHAPTER XXV.
The Smuggler's Cave                                 208

                     CHAPTER XXVI.
The Fate of a Miser                                 216

                     CHAPTER XXVII.
Conclusion                                          224

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




POCKET ISLAND.

CHAPTER I.

POCKET ISLAND.


In the year 185- a Polish Jew peddler named Wolf and a roving Micmac
Indian met at a small village on Annapolis Bay, in Nova Scotia, and
there and then formed a partnership.

It was one of those chance meetings between two atoms tossed hither and
thither in the whirligig of life; for the peddler, shrewd, calculating
and unscrupulous, was wandering along the Acadian shores driving hard
bargains in small wares; and the Indian, like his race, fond of a
roaming life, was drifting about the bay in a small sloop he owned,
fishing where he would, hunting when he chose, stopping a week in some
uninhabited cove to set traps, or lounging in a village drinking or
gambling.

The Jew had a little money and, what was of more value, brains and
audacity. He also knew the conditions then prevalent along the Maine
coast, and all the risks, as well as the profit, to be obtained in
smuggling liquor. Rum was cheap in Nova Scotia and dear in Maine. The
Indian with his sloop formed one means to an end; his money and cunning
the other. A verbal compact to join these two forces on the basis of
share and share alike for mutual profit, was entered into, and Captain
Wolf and the Sea Fox, as the sloop was named, with the Indian and his
dog for crew, began their career.

As a preliminary some fifty kegs of assorted liquors, as many empty
mackerel kits, a small stock of oil clothing, sea boots, fishing gear,
tobaccos, etc., were purchased and stowed away on the sloop, and then
she set sail.

There were along the coast of Maine in those days many uninhabited
islands seldom visited. Fishermen avoided them, for the deep sea
furnished safer and more profitable ground; coasters gave them a wide
berth, and there were no others to disturb them. Among these, and lying
midway between Monhegan and Big Spoon Islands, and distant from the Isle
au Haut, the nearest inhabited one, about twenty miles, was a freak of
nature known as "The Pocket," or Pocket Island, as shown on the maps.
This merits a brief description. It was hollow. That is, from a general
view it appeared like an attempt to inclose a small portion of the sea
within high, fir-covered walls. It resembled a horseshoe with the points
drawn close. Neptune beat Jove, however, leaving a narrow fissure
connecting the inclosed water and the outer ocean, and through this the
tides flowed fiercely; but so protected was the inner harbor that never
a ripple disturbed its surface. It was this harbor that gave the island
its name.

Occasionally a shipwreck occurred here. In 1842 the British barque
Lancaster was driven on to this island in a winter night snowstorm, and
all hands perished. Five of the crew were washed ashore alive, only to
freeze among the snow-covered rocks. The vessel went entirely to pieces
in one night and the wreck was not discovered until two years after by a
stray fisherman, who suddenly came upon the bleaching bones and grinning
skulls of those unfortunate sailors. The island was a menace to coasters
and bore an uncanny reputation. It was said to be haunted. During a
night storm a tall man had been seen, by a flash of lightning, standing
on a cliff. Strange sounds like the cries of dying men had been heard.
When the waves were high, a noise like that made by a bellowing bull was
noticed. The ocean and its storms play queer pranks at times, especially
at night. White bursts of foam leaping over black rocks assume ghostly
shape. Dark and grotesque figures appear crawling into or out of
fissures, or hiding behind rocks. Hideous and devilish, snarling and
snapping, sounds issue from caverns. In darkness an uninhabited coast
becomes peopled with demons who sport and scream and leap in hellish
glee.

Such a spot was Pocket Island.

Nature also played another prank here, and as if to furnish a lair for
some sea monster she hollowed a cavern in the island, with an entrance
below tidewater and at the head of this harbor. Inside and above
tide-level it broadened into a small room. As if to still further
isolate the island all about it were countless rocks and ledges bare
only at low tide and, like a serried cordon of black fangs, ready to
bite and destroy any vessel that approached. It is probable that the
Indians who formerly inhabited the Maine coast had explored this island
and discovered the cave. An Indian is always looking for such things. It
is his nature. It may be this wandering and half-civilized remnant of a
nearly extinct tribe whom the Jew had compacted with, knew of this sea
cavern and piloted his sloop into the safe shelter of "the pocket." And
it was a secure shelter. No one came here; no one was likely to. Its
uncanny reputation, added to the almost impassable barricade of rocks
and ledges all about, made it what Captain Wolf needed--a veritable
burrow for a sea fox. Here he brought his cargo of contraband spirits
and stored them in the cave. Here he repacked kegs of rum inside of
empty mackerel kits, storing them aboard the sloop with genuine ones. By
this ruse he almost obliterated the chance of detection. Like a sly fox,
he was always on guard. Even when the sloop was safe at anchor, he
worked only in the cave. When all was ready, he and his swarthy partner
would wait till low tide, then load the dozen or more rum-charged kits
and set sail for the coast. In these ventures Wolf realized what his
race have always wanted--the Jew's one per cent.

In this island cave nature had placed a curiosity, known as a rocking
stone. In was a boulder of many tons' weight near the wall of the room,
and so poised that a push of the hand at one particular point would move
it easily. When so moved a little niche in the rock-wall back of it was
exposed. Wolf had discovered this one day while alone in the cave and
utilized it as a hiding place for his money.

Here he would come alone and, taking out the increasing bags of coin,
empty them on a flat stone and, by the light of a lamp, count their
contents again and again. Those shining coins were his god and all his
religion; and in this damp and dark sea cavern and by the dim light of a
lamp he came to worship.

The Indian could neither read nor write, add nor subtract, and while he
knew the value of coins, he was unable to compute them. Wolf knew this
and, unprincipled as he was, he not only defied all law in smuggling,
but he had from the first defied all justice, and cheated his partner in
the division of profit. As the Indian was never present when either
buying or selling took place, and had no knowledge of arithmetic, this
was an easy matter. Wolf gave him a little money, of course. He needed
him and his vessel; also his help in sailing her. Not only was the
Indian a faithful helper, but he held his tongue as well, which was very
important. When in some Nova Scotia port the money Wolf gave him as his
share was usually spent in drinking and gambling, which suited Wolf, who
only desired to use him as a medium.

An Indian has no sense of economy, no thought of the morrow. To hunt,
fish and eat to-day and let the future provide for itself is enough. If
he works one day, it is that he may spend the next. Among the aborigines
thrift was an unknown quantity, and the scattered remnants of those
tribes existing to-day are the same. As they were hundreds of years ago,
so are they now. They were satisfied with bark wigwams then; a board and
a mud hovel is enough to-day. They cannot comprehend a white man's
ambition to work that he may dress and live well, and all money and all
thought spent in civilizing the Indian has only resulted in degrading
him. He absorbs all the white man's vices and none of his virtues. Not
only that, but the effort to redeem him has warped and twisted him into
a cunning and revengeful creature; all malice and no honor. So true is
this that the fact has crystalized itself into the universal belief that
the only good Indian is a dead one.

Such a one, though not comprehended by Wolf, was his partner. While that
fox-like Jew was reaping rich profit and deluding himself in believing
he was successfully cheating an Indian, he was only sowing the seed that
soon or late was destined to end in murder.




CHAPTER II.

THE SEA FOX.


While Neal Dow and his associates were conducting an organized crusade
against the sale of liquor in Maine, and that fruitless legislation
known as the Maine Law was being enforced, there entered a small coast
port in that State one day a sloop called the Sea Fox, manned by a white
man, an Indian and a dog.

The white man had sinister black eyes; the Indian was tall and swarthy.
He and the dog remained on board the sloop; the Jew, or, as he called
himself, Captain Wolf, came ashore. He declared himself to be a small
coast trader in search of choice lots of fish, and incidentally having
for sale clothing, tobacco and various small wares. He lounged about the
wharves and buildings devoted to curing fish, talking fish and fishing
to all. He seemed to be in search of information, and appeared ready and
willing to buy small and choice lots of cured fish at a low price; also
to sell the assortment of wares he carried. He invited prospective
buyers to visit his sloop, and exerted himself to interest them. While
he seemed anxious to sell, he made no sales; and though willing to buy
he bought nothing. He was in no hurry. He just ran in to look the market
over and see if there was a chance to buy at a price that would enable
him to make a fair profit. If not, he might come again, or may be he
could do better elsewhere. His mission appeared innocent and natural
enough and he and his small craft were duly accepted for what they
appeared to be.

Had any one, however, examined the dozen or so kits of mackerel which
appeared as part of his cargo, they would have found, not fish, but a
species of bait ofttimes used by fishermen; and could they have read
between the lines of Captain Wolf's innocent inquiries they would have
learned that fishing information was the thing he cared least about.
Though Wolf talked trade, but did no trading; was anxious to buy, and
bought not; willing to sell and sold not; it need not be inferred he
transacted no business. Had any of these coast residents been blessed
with the occult ability to see beyond the apparent facts, and to
overhear, they might have learned of certain hard, if illegal, bargains
made between Wolf and one or more of their number, and they might have
witnessed late at night various mysterious movements of a small boat
passing from shore to the sloop empty, and returning laden with
apparently harmless kits of fish. Had these good people been still more
watchful they would have seen the Sea Fox spread her sails and depart
before dawn. Whence Wolf came no one knew; whither he went, no one
guessed. Like a strange bird of prey, like a fox at night, he stole into
port on occasions wide apart and unexpected, and as mysteriously went
his way.

The coast of Maine was particularly well adapted to aid Captain Wolf in
his peculiar enterprise. The great tide of summer travel had not then
started and its countless bays, coves and inlets were unmolested.
Wherever a safe harbor occurred a small village had clustered about it
and the larger islands only were inhabited. The residents of these
hamlets were mainly engaged in fishing or coasting, and of a guileless
nature. They were honest themselves, and not easy to suspect dishonesty
in others. Into these ports Wolf could sail unsuspected, and, like the
cunning fox he was, easily dupe them by his rôle of innocent trader till
he found some one as unscrupulous as he, who was willing to take the
chance and share his illegal profit.

While he played his rôle of fox by day and smuggled by night, it was not
without risk. The crusaders against the liquor traffic had an organized
force of spies and reformers. In every town there was one or more, and
as the reformers received half of all fines or value of liquor seized it
may be seen that the Sea Fox had enemies. No one knew it any better than
Wolf, and, like the human fox he was, no one was any more capable of
guarding against them. Well skilled in the most adroit kind of
deception, in comparison to his enemies he was as the fox is to the
rabbit, the hawk to the chicken. Frequently he would set traps for his
pursuers, and, giving them apparent reason for suspicion, would thus
invite a search. On these occasions, it is needless to say, no liquor
was found on board the Sea Fox. To discover his enemies by the method of
inviting pursuit and then doubling on his track as Reynard does was
child's play to him. In each town he had an accomplice who dare not, if
he would, betray him.

Captain Wolf was also a miser. He loved gold as none but misers do. To
him it was wife, child and heaven all in one, and its chink as he
counted it was the sweetest of music. For four years he played his rôle
and continually reaped rich reward, and then he resolved to quit. But,
true to his nature, before doing so he decided to play the hyena. He had
for all these years cheated the law; now he planned to cheat those who
aided him. To this end he set a trap. When a fox sets a trap he sets it
well. Wolf began by circulating an alluring story of a chance to share
in the distribution of a large cargo of contraband spirits, provided
those who could so share would buy a _pro rata_ large amount at reduced
price. Having thus set and baited his trap, he proceeded to spring it.
He had, in his wanderings, obtained a formula for the manufacture of
spurious brandy. All that was required was a few cheap chemicals and
water. He purchased the former; on Pocket Island there was a spring that
furnished the latter. Feeling sure that those whom he had duped would
not dare to expose him, he yet acted cautiously and began his cheating
at widely separated points. He had usually disposed of small lots at a
time. He doubled and sometimes trebled these, and the hoard of silver
and gold behind the rocking stone grew rapidly. Trip after trip he made
to the various ports he had been accustomed to visit, never calling at
the same one twice, and at each springing his well-set trap, pocketing
his almost stolen money and disappearing, leaving behind him curses and
threats of revenge. When all whom he could thus dupe were robbed by this
wily Jew and he had secured all the profit they, as his accomplices, had
made, Captain Wolf and the Sea Fox sailed away to his unknown lair at
Pocket Island, and were never heard of afterward.




CHAPTER III.

NEMESIS.


While Captain Wolf was carrying out his scheme to rob his accomplices in
smuggling, he was planning a still more despicable act, and that was to
take his hoard of money, stow all valuables on the sloop, sail to a Nova
Scotia port, and when near it, to kill the Indian, sell the Sea Fox and
cross the ocean.

There were several weighty reasons for this. In the first place, those
bags of coin behind the rocking stone weighed on his mind. He was a
miser, and never before had he so much wealth he could call his own. A
few hundred dollars at the most were all he had ever possessed. Now he
had thousands. Money was his god, and to escape from danger and carry it
with him seemed prudent. He was aware he was suspected of being, and in
fact was known to be, a smuggler. While as yet undiscovered in his
island lair, he might at any time be pounced upon. His act of swindling
his accomplices, he knew well, would create revengeful enemies, who
would spare neither time nor money to hunt him down.

Then there was the Indian whom he had also robbed from the start. He
might become suspicious and betray him, or worse yet, discover the
secret of the rocking stone. Wolf had discovered it by accident; why
might not the Indian? With murder in his heart, Wolf for the first time
began to be afraid. He put the pistols he had always carried in perfect
order and ready for instant use. So far as he had discovered, the Indian
possessed neither knife nor pistol; but nevertheless Wolf feared him,
and the more he realized the danger he had incurred in duping his
assistants in smuggling, and how much he was really in the power of his
giant-framed partner, the more his fears grew. It may be thought it was
conscience working in him; but it was not, for such as he have none. It
was guilty fear, and that only. This so preyed upon his mind during his
last trip to the coast that he could hardly sleep. Then he began to
imagine that the Indian was suspicious of him. To allay that danger he
doubled the small share of profit he had given his partner, knowing full
well if he had no chance to spend it, it would all come back to him in
the end. Then he set about deceiving him by an offer to buy the Sea Fox
and pay what he believed the Indian would consider a fabulous price. It
was a fatal mistake. The Indian had no real idea of the value of his
sloop. It had come to him as payment for his share of a successful
fishing-trip to The Banks years before, and he had become attached to
that craft. It had been his home, his floating wigwam, for a long time,
and for Wolf to want to buy it hurt him.

"Me no sell boat," he said, when the offer was made. "Me want sloop long
time."

Wolf, who valued all things from a miser's standpoint, could not
understand that there might lurk in the Indian a tinge of sentiment. He
was mistaken, and the mistake was a little pitfall placed in his way.

There was another which he was also to blame for, and yet, like the
first, he was not aware of it. In the cave where he had stored his cargo
and prepared it for smuggling, he kept a large can of cheap and highly
inflammable oil on a rock shelf, just above the flat stone where he, by
the light of two lamps, had counted his wealth time and again. True to
his nature, when he bought the oil he bought the cheapest, and unknown
to him the can had sprung a leak and while he had been absent for weeks
at a time, the oil had run out, saturating the rock below and forming
little pools on the cave floor among the loose stones. Wolf had not
noticed this, or, if he had, had thought nothing of it. Neither did he
realize how fate could utilize his miser's instinct in purchasing the
cheap can as a means to bring together and bless two lives unknown to
him. We seldom do notice the snags in life that usually trip us.

By the time the last voyage of the Sea Fox had been made and she
returned to The Pocket, the relations between Wolf and the Indian were
in danger of rupture. Wolf distrusted his partner, and yet believed he
had lulled all suspicion. He had never failed before in duping any one
he had set out to; why should he in this case? Still, he was uneasy and
resolved to end it all as soon as possible. But Indians have one
peculiarity that will baffle even the shrewdest Jew. They never talk.
Their faces are always as expressionless as a graven image. While
contemplating the most cruel murder they never show the least change in
expression, nor do their eyes show the faintest shadow of an emotion.
They are stolid, surly and Sphinx-like always. Wolf's partner was like
his race, and not even by the droop of an eyelid did he betray the
slowly gathering storm of hate and rage within. He brooded over the
hurt he felt when Wolf had wanted to buy his sloop, and believing the
Jew meant to rob him of her, he grew suspicious and watched Wolf. Not by
word or sign did he show it, and the Jew saw it not. Wolf watched the
Indian as closely, only the Indian knew it, and Wolf did not. It was now
Wolf against fox and fox against Wolf, and the swarthy fox was getting
the best of it. Meanwhile the loading of the sloop for her final
departure proceeded.

Wolf had planned to use the Indian's help to the last, and when all was
ready, enter the cave, secure the money about his person and sail away.
The cave entrance was under water for about two hours of high tide, and
Wolf waited until a day came when the tide served early. He had planned
to go in just before the rising water closed the entrance, thus securing
himself from intrusion; and then, when the tide fell away, to come out
ready to start. The day and hour came and he entered the cave.

Unknown to him the Indian followed!

Wolf lighted a lamp and sat down. When the sea had closed the entrance,
no sound entered. Wolf waited. Ten, twenty, thirty minutes passed, and
all sound of the ocean ceased. He believed himself alone. He lighted the
other lamp, placing both on the flat rock. Then he went to the rocking
stone, and pushing it back, took from the niche, one by one, the bags of
coin. These he carried to the table stone and poured their contents into
a glittering pile.

From behind a rock a pair of sinister eyes watched him!

He felt that he had two hours of absolute seclusion and need not hurry.
He began to slowly pile the coins in little stacks and count them. There
was no reason for haste and he counted carefully. He enjoyed this beyond
all else in his vile life, and desired to prolong the pleasure. The
money was all his, and he gloated over it. No sense of awe at his
separation from all things human in that damp, silent cavern, still as a
tomb, came over him. No thought of the murder he was soon to commit; no
feeling of remorse, no impulse of good; no thought of the future or of
God--entered his soul. Only the miser's joy of possession. Not a sound
entered the cavern and only the chink of the coin, as he counted it,
disturbed the deathly silence.

Still the sinister eyes watched him from out the darkness!

Stack after stack he piled till all was counted--eight of one thousand
dollars each, and twelve of five hundred dollars, all in gold; and
twenty of one hundred dollars each in silver.

A tall, swarthy form crept noiselessly toward him!

It was the supreme moment of his life, and as he gloatingly gazed on the
stacks glittering in the dim light before him, a delirium of joy hushed
all thought and deadened all sense, even that of hearing.

Nearer and nearer drew the swarthy form!

And as Wolf tasted the sublime ecstasy of a miser's joy, his heaven, his
God, suddenly two cold, massive hands closed tight about his throat. But
men die hard! Even while unable to breathe, and as he writhed and
twisted beneath the awful menace of death bearing him down, his hand
suddenly touched the pistol in his belt! The next instant it was drawn
and fired full against the Indian's breast! Then a shriek of death
agony, as his swarthy foe leaped upward against the rocky shelf; a crash
of breaking glass; a flash of fierce flame bursting into red billows,
curling and seething all about him and turning the cave into a mimic
hell!

Outside could be heard the sound of a bellowing bull!




CHAPTER IV.

THE BOY.


A boy is an inverted man. Small things seem to him great and great ones
small. Trifling troubles move him to tears and serious ones pass
unnoticed. To snare a few worthless suckers in the meadow brook is to
the country boy of more importance than the gathering of a field of
grain. To play hooky and go nutting is far better than to study and fit
himself for earning a livelihood. He works at his play and makes play of
his work. He disdains boyhood and longs for manhood. In spite of his
inverted position I would rather be a boy than a man, and a country boy
than a city-bred one.

The country boy has so much the greater chance for enjoyment and is not
so soon warped by restrictions and tarnished by the sewers of vice. He
has deep forests, wide meadows and pure brooks to play in; and if his
feet grow broad from lack of shoes, he hears the song of birds, the
whispers of winds in the trees, and knows the scent of new-mown hay and
fresh water lilies, the beauty of flowers, green fields and shady woods.
He learns how apples taste eaten under the tree, nuts cracked in the
woods, sweet cider as it runs from the press, and strawberries picked in
the orchard while moist with dew. All these delights are a closed book
to the city boy. The country boy is surrounded by pure and wholesome
influences and grows to be a better man for it. The wide range of forest
and field, pure air, sweet water, plenty of sun and rain are all his,
and worth ten times the chance for life, health, enjoyment and a good
character than ever comes to the city boy. He may sooner learn to smoke
or gather a choice selection of profane and vulgar words; he may have
smaller feet and better clothes, but he often fails in attaining a
healthy body and pure mind and never knows what a royal, wide-open
chance for enjoying boyhood days he has missed. He never knows the
delight of wading barefoot down a mountain brook where the clear water
leaps over mossy ledges and where he can pull trout from every
foam-flecked pool! He never realizes the charming suspense of lying upon
the grassy bank of a meadow stream and snaring a sucker, or what fun it
is to enter a chestnut grove just after frost and rain have covered the
ground with brown nuts, or setting traps, shaking apple trees, or
gathering wild grapes! He never rode to the cider-mill on a load of
apples and had the chance to shy one at every bird and squirrel on the
way; or when winter came, to slide down hill when the slide was a
half-mile field of crusted snow! All these and many other delights he
never knows; but one thing he does know, and knows it early, and that is
how much smarter, better dressed and better off in every way he is than
the poor, despised greeny of a country boy! He may, it is true, go early
to the theatre and look at half-nude actresses loaded with diamonds, but
he never sees a twenty-acre cedar pasture just after an ice storm when
the morning sun shines fair upon it!

True to his inverted comprehension, the country boy, and our boy
especially, sees and feels all his surroundings and all the voices of
nature from a boy's standpoint. He feels that his hours of work are long
and hard, and that the countless chores are interspersed through his
daily life on the farm for the sole purpose of preventing him from
having a moment he can call his own. He has a great many pleasant hours,
however, and does not realize why they pass so quickly. His little
world seems large to him and all his experiences great in their
importance. A ten-acre meadow appears like a boundless prairie, and a
half-mile wide piece of woods an unbounded forest.

On one side of the farm is a clear stream known as Ragged Brook, that,
starting among the foothills of a low mountain range, laughs and
chatters, leaps and tumbles, down the hills, through the gorges and over
the ledges as if endowed with life. Since he is not blessed with
brothers or sisters, this, together with the woods, the birds and
squirrels, becomes his companion. The first trout he ever catches in
this brook seems a monster and never afterward does one pull quite so
hard. Isolated as he is, and having none but his elders for company, he
talks to the creatures of the field and forest as if they could
understand him, and he watches their ways and habits and tries to make
them his friends. He is a lonely boy, and seldom sees others of his age,
so that perhaps when he does they make a more distinct impression on his
mind.

One day he is allowed to go to the mill with his father, and it is an
event in his life he never forgets. The old brown mill with its big
wheel splashing in the clear water; the millstones that rumble so
swiftly; the dusty miller who takes the bags of grain--all interest him,
and especially so does the pond above the mill that is dotted with white
lilies and where there is a boat fastened to a willow by a chain. On the
way back, and a mile from home, his father stops to chat with a man in
front of a large house with tall pillars, and two immense maples on
either side of the gate. Standing beside the man and holding onto one of
his hands with her two small ones is a little girl who looks at the boy
with big, wondrous eyes. He wants to tell her about the mill and ask her
if she ever saw the great wheel go around, but he is afraid to. He hears
the man call her "Liddy," and wonders if she ever caught a fish.

Then his world grows larger as the months pass one by one, until he is
sent to a little brown schoolhouse a mile away and finds a small crowd
of boys and girls, only two or three of whom he ever saw before. One of
them is the girl who looked wonderingly at him a year previous. He tells
her he knows what her name is, and feels a little hurt because that fact
does not seem to interest her. He studies his lessons because he is told
he must, and plays hard because he enjoys it. He feels no special
attraction toward any of his schoolmates until one winter day this same
little blue-eyed girl asks him for a place on his sled. He shares it
with her as a well-behaved boy should, and so begins the first faint
bond of feeling that like a tiny rill on the hillside slowly gathers
power, until at last, a mighty river, it sweeps all other feelings
before it.

How slowly that rippling rill of feeling grew during the next few years
need not be specified. Like other boys of his age, he feels at times
ashamed of caring whether she notices him or not, and again the
incipient pangs of jealousy, because she notices other boys. In a year
he begins to bring her flag-root in summer, or big apples in winter, and
although her way home is different from his, he occasionally feels
called upon to accompany her, heedless of the fact that it costs him an
extra half-mile and fault-finding at being late home. He passes unharmed
through the terrors of speaking pieces on examination day, and when St.
Valentine's day comes he conquers the momentous task of inditing a verse
where "bliss" rhymes with "kiss" upon one of those missives which he has
purchased for five cents at the village store, and timidly leaves it
where this same girl will find it, in her desk at school.

On two occasions during the last summer at the district school,
he--quite a big boy now--joins the older boys and girls under a large
apple tree that grows near the schoolhouse, and plays a silly game, the
principal feature of which consists in his having to choose some girl to
kiss. As he knows very well whom he prefers, and has the courage to kiss
her when his turn comes, that seems a most delightful game; and although
he and other boys who were guilty of this proceeding are jeered at by
the younger ones, the experience makes such an impression on him that he
lies awake half the first night thinking about it.

But all too soon to him comes the end of schooldays and especially the
charming companionship of this particular fair-haired girl. On the last
day she asks him to write in her album, and he again indulges in rhyme
and inscribes therein a melancholy verse, the tenor of which is a hope
that she will see that his grave is kept green, as such an unhappy duty
must, in the near future, devolve upon some one. She in turn writes him
a farewell note of similar tone, and encloses a lock of her hair tied
with a blue ribbon. He has planned to walk home with her when the last
day ends, and perhaps participate in a more tender leave-taking, but she
rides home with her parents, and so that sweet scheme is foiled. With a
heavy heart he watches her out of sight and then, feeling that possibly
he may never see her again, takes his books and turns away from the dear
old brown schoolhouse for the last time. He locks the curl of hair and
her note up in a tin box where he keeps his fish-hooks, and resumes his
unending round of hard work and chores. His horizon has enlarged a good
deal, for he is now twelve years old--but it does not yet include Liddy.

It is over a year before he sees her again, though once, when given a
rainy half-day to fish in Ragged Brook, he, like a silly boy, deserts
that enticing stream for an hour and cuts across lots near her home in
hopes that he may see her again, but fails.

Then one summer day a surprise comes to him. Half a mile from his home,
and in the direction his thoughts often turn, is a cedar pasture where
blackberries grow in plenty, and here he is sent to pick them. It is
here, and while unconscious what Fate has in store for him, that he
suddenly hears a scream, and running toward him, down the path comes a
girl in a short dress with a calico sun-bonnet flying behind her, until
almost at his feet she stumbles and falls and there, sprawling on the
grass, is--Liddy.

In an instant he is at her side, and how glad he is of the chance to
help her up and soothe her fears no one but himself ever knows. She,
too, has been picking berries, and has come suddenly upon a monster
snake just gliding from a cedar bough almost over her head. When her
fright subsides he at once hunts for and kills that reptile with far
more satisfaction than he ever felt in killing one before. It is an
ungrateful return, for although the boy knew it not, the snake has done
him a greater kindness than he ever realized. Then when all danger is
removed, how sweet it is to sit beside her in the shade and talk over
schooldays while he looks into her tender blue eyes. And how glad he is
to fill her pail with berries which he has picked, and when the sun is
almost down how charming it is to walk home with her along the
maple-shaded lane! He even hopes that he will see another snake so that
he can kill that also, and show her how brave a boy is. But no more
snakes come to his aid that day and only the gentlest of breezes rustles
the spreading boughs that shade their pathway. When she thanks him at
parting, a little look of gratitude makes her blue eyes seem more
tender than ever to him and her voice sound like sweetest music.

His world has enlarged wonderfully now, for Liddy has entered into it.




CHAPTER V.

THE BOY'S FIRST PARTY.


The Stillman girls were going to give a party, and the boy was invited.
It was the first social recognition he had ever received, and it
disturbed his equilibrium. It also made him feel that he was almost a
man.

He had for some time longed to be a man, and for a year past had felt
hurt when called a boy. When the little note of invitation, requesting
"the pleasure of your company," etc., reached him, he felt he had
suddenly grown taller. He realized it more fully that night when he
tried on his best clothes to see how they would look. The sleeves of his
jacket were too short and his pants missed connections with his boots by
full two inches. The gap seemed to swell the size of his feet, also.
When he looked in his little mirror he noticed a plainly defined growth
of down on his lip, and his hair needed cutting.

Then the invitation filled him with mingled fear, surprise and
pleasure. He hardly knew, after thinking it all over, whether he wanted
to go or not. The one fact that turned the scale was Liddy. He was sure
she would be there. But then, that painful gap between his pants and
boots! He had thought a good deal about her ever since school was over.
Now that he was invited to a party where she would be, he began to feel
just a little afraid of her.

When the important evening came and he presented himself at the
Stillmans' house, and lifted the big iron knocker on the front door, its
clang sounded loud enough to wake the dead, and his heart was going like
a trip-hammer. Mary Stillman met him at the door, and her welcome was so
cordial he couldn't understand it. He wasn't much used to society. All
his schoolmates were there--boys that he had played ball, snared
suckers, and gone in swimming with scores of times, and girls that
seemed a good deal taller than when they went to school. Most of them
were dressed in white, and with their rosy cheeks and bright eyes made a
pretty picture.

They were nearly all in one of the big front rooms, and among them was
Liddy, in pink muslin with a broad sash, and bows of blue ribbon at the
ends of her two braids of hair. She looked so sweet he was more afraid
of her than ever. His first thought was to go into the room where some
of the boys were, but Mary Stillman almost pushed him into the other
room and he felt that he was in for it. When he sat down next to another
boy and looked at the girls whispering and giggling together, he almost
wished he had not come. Then when he thought of that unfriendly
separation of his pants and boots he was sure of it. But he caught a
pleasant smile and nod from Liddy, and that gave him a world of courage.

Then he began to talk to the boy next to him, and was just beginning to
forget that he was at a party, in an exchange of experiences about bee
hunting and finding wild honey, when the oldest Stillman girl proposed
they play button. He had never played button and wasn't anxious to, for
it might necessitate his walking about the room and expose that gap
still more. He preferred to talk bee-hunting with Jim Pratt. He was soon
made to realize, however, that there was a different sort of wild honey
to be gathered at a party, and "Button, button, who's got the button?"
was the method. When it came his turn to pay a forfeit, he was directed
to measure three yards of tape with Liddy. As this consisted in
kneeling face to face with her on a cushion in the center of the room,
joining hands, expanding arms to the limit, and back again, punctuating
each outward stretch with a kiss, it wasn't so bad. He was sorry it
wasn't six yards instead of three. He could stand it if Liddy
could--only he hoped that no one had noticed that gap. On the next
round, Jim Pratt was ordered to stand in a well four feet deep and
choose a girl to pull him out. As four feet meant four kisses, and Jim
knew a good thing when he saw it, he chose Liddy. And then the boy felt
like licking him.

After button came post office, and the boy had a letter from Nellie
Barnes, with five cents postage due, which called for his catching
Nellie and kissing her five times. By this time he had forgotten he was
at a party with abbreviated pants, and was having no end of a good time.
Then some one started the good old frolic of run 'round chimney, and as
the Stillman house was admirably adapted for that, the fun waxed fast
and furious. It was catch any girl you wanted to, and kiss her if you
did. In the romp the boy's collar came off, and he asked Liddy to pin it
on, and when she purposely pricked him a little, he grabbed her and
kissed her a few times extra, just for luck. He was rapidly realizing
why he was there, and what for. And that gap had passed entirely out of
his mind.

Then the boys, all rather warm and excited, were requested to go into
the kitchen and carry refreshments to the girls, and our boy and Liddy
were soon ensconced in a cosy corner with two plates filled with a
medley of frosted cake, mince pie, tarts and the like, and as happy as
two birds in a nest. It was the first time he had ever eaten with her,
and an event in his life of no small importance. They also talked as
fast as they ate. She told him all her little plans about going to the
village academy the next term, and what she liked to study, and all
about a little white rabbit that her father had given her on her last
birthday and how cunning it was. The boy decided at once that he would
have a white rabbit if he had to steal one. He also told her that he had
found a nest of young foxes that summer and had kept them ever since in
a pen, and he offered to give her one. He also assured her he, too,
meant to go to the academy if his parents would let him. It was a
charming visit, and the boy's heart warmed in a wonderful way, and
Liddy's blue eyes looked into his brown ones so sweetly that he felt as
if heaven was just ahead. Like a wise boy he asked her then and there if
he could go home with her, which, of course, he could, and so all was
well. Almost before any one realized it, the time for the party to break
up came, and with a chorus of "good-nights" the happy gathering ended.

When the boy, with Liddy's soft hand curled confidingly around his arm,
started for her home, a mile away, he was proud as a king, and far
happier. And that long walk in the moonlight, while

    "On his arm a soft hand rested; rested light as ocean's foam,"--

could he, or would he, ever forget it? I think not. It was a poem of
blue eyes like spring violets, of tender, loving words, of mellow
moonlight on the fields where the corn-shocks stood in spectral rows,
and the brook they crossed looked like a rippling stream of silver;
where the maples along the lane, still clad in yellow foliage, cast
mottled shadows in their pathway, and the fallen leaves rustled beneath
their feet. They did not talk much--their hearts were too full of love's
young dream--although he told her of his visit to a deserted house a
year before, and how he heard ghostly footsteps in the house, and saw a
closet door swing half open in a shadowy room, and he was sure there was
a ghost in that closet; at which Liddy's arm clasped his a little
closer. Maybe he enlarged a trifle upon that spook. Almost any boy with
a fertile imagination and his sweetheart clinging to his arm, on a
moonlit maple lane, with no one near, would. I am sure I would if I were
a boy.

When her home was reached he was revolving a serious problem in his
mind. To kiss Liddy in the games at the party was easy enough. It was a
part of the play, and expected. He had even ventured a few independent
ones when she pricked him, and though he got his ears boxed, she didn't
seem angry. But to deliberately kiss her now at parting was an entirely
different matter. No doubt Liddy knew what he was thinking about, for
when the gate was reached she paused and did not enter. She thanked him
sweetly for his company home, and declared she had had a delightful
time. He assured her he had, and then there was a pause. It was a
critical moment. He looked at the moon, high overhead. The man in it--as
all men would--seemed to say: "Now's your chance, my boy; kiss her
quick!" And yet he hesitated. Then he looked at the near-by brook where
the ripples were like dancing silver coin, and then at Liddy. Maybe the
laughter of those ripples gave him courage, for he hesitated no longer,
but full upon her rosy lips he kissed her. Then he walked home, and all
the long mile, though his feet trod the earth, he knew it not. Rather
was he floating on ripples of moonlight, with a fairy-like face and
tender blue eyes ever hovering over him, and a soft white hand clinging
to his arm.

And so ended the boy's first party.




CHAPTER VI.

SERIOUS THOUGHTS.


When the boy reached home a new and surprising change had come to him.
For the first time in his life he began to think--and what was more to
the point, to faintly see himself as he was, and the picture was not
pleasant. He had longed to be a man. He began to feel that he was almost
one, and a poorly clad and ignorant one at that. He lay awake nearly all
that night, and not only lived the party over, but more especially the
walk home with Liddy.

All he had cared for before was boyish sports, to do his work, and
escape wearing his best clothes. Now he began to think about those same
clothes and how ill they fitted him and how awkward they made him look,
and the more he thought about it the more he wondered how Liddy could
have been so nice to him. He vowed he would never be seen in public
again with them on. He had seen boys in the village who wore neat and
well-fitting garments, a starched shirt and collar that buttoned to it,
instead of being pinned to the top of a roundabout, as his was, and
thinking of them made him ashamed of himself. And then that awful gap
between his pants and boots! Then he thought of how the girls were
laughing when he came into the room at the party, and now he felt sure
they must have been making fun of him, and that made him feel worse than
ever. His coarse boots, in comparison with the nice, thin ones worn by
some of the other boys there, also haunted him. In short, he took a
mental inventory of himself, and the sum total was not pleasing.

All the next day he was glum and thoughtful and for a week he acted the
same. It was the birth of the man in him; the step from the happy,
care-free boy to young manhood. It was also, be it said, the beginning
of a woman's refining influence that has slowly and for countless ages
gradually lifted man from savagery to enlightenment. An evolution of
good conduct, garb and cleanliness made necessary by woman's favor, and
to win her admiration. The cynics call it vanity. So then, must they
call the evolution of the species vanity. It may be so, but call it what
you will, it's the influence that has wrought the naked savage,
decorated with paint and feathers, and courting his wife by knocking her
senseless with a club and carrying her to a cave, into the well-dressed,
gallant, kindly, thoughtful and refined gentleman of to-day.

Just a little of this realizing sense of what he should be, and why,
came to the boy, and as ever will be it was a woman's face and a woman's
smiles, albeit a very young and blue-eyed one, that inspired the
thought. His parents rallied him a little about the party, but to him it
was--especially its ending, a sacred secret. Then one day he astonished
them by asking if he might have a new suit and go to the academy that
coming winter. He had never before shown any unusual eagerness for
study, and this request was surprising. For several weeks the question
was held in abeyance, though duly considered in the family councils; and
then one day at the supper-table the answer came.

"If the boy wants more learnin'," his father said, "by gosh, he can have
it. I never had much chance at books myself, but that ain't no reason
why he shouldn't. We'll fix ye up," he said cheerfully, with a twinkle
in his eye, "so ye won't be ashamed to go to a party again;" from which
it may be inferred that the old gentleman had divined some things which
the boy little suspected he had.

When the winter term at the village academy opened, the boy was there,
his courage a good deal strengthened by a new suit that fitted and a
pair of boots that did not give the impression that he was falling
downstairs at every step. But his entry into the new school was not a
thornless path. Most of the faces were new to him, and many a good deal
older. He still felt himself what he was--a big, awkward boy, though a
boy with a determined will to study hard and make the most of his
opportunity.

He soon learned a good many things; one of which was that earnestness in
study did not always win the favor of either teacher or schoolmates;
that in school, as in the world, pleasant manners and flattering words
counted for more than devotion to duty. He also learned that such a
thing as favoritism between master and pupil existed, and that the
poorest scholar often stood nearest the teacher's heart. The master, Mr.
Webber, he discovered, had a monstrous bump of self-esteem. He was a
small man, not larger than the boy, who was sixteen, and large for his
age, and who, as big boys will, cherished a sort of contempt for small
men. It is possible that the boy was entirely wrong in his estimate of
the principal. No doubt that worthy, judged from an adult standpoint,
was the most courtly and diplomatic pedagogue that ever let his favorite
pupils whisper all they pleased, and banged the floor with the other
sinners; but, to the boy, he seemed a little, arrogant bit of
bumptiousness, who strutted about the schoolroom and was especially fond
of hearing himself read aloud. "The Raven" was his favorite selection,
and he read it no less than thirteen times during one term.

The boy did not feel at home at the academy. It was so unlike the dear
old district school. But he felt it was a good training for him, and he
watched the older scholars and studied hard. The girls all wore long
dresses, and, as a rule, were just budding into young womanhood. Of
these he was a trifle afraid, especially of Liddy, who was one of the
prettiest. She was also one of the best scholars, and in her studies
easily a leader. It acted as a spur to the boy, whose secret though
ardent admiration had originally been the motive force that brought him
to the academy. His pride was such that he was ashamed to have her
surpass him, and for her to solve a problem in algebra that he had
failed on, humiliated him.

Another thing he learned that winter besides his lessons, was that
stylish clothes and genteel manners in a young man counted far more in a
girl's estimation than proficiency in study. There was one pupil in
particular, named James White, who, though dull in lessons, was popular
with the girls. He was the fop of the school, wore the nattiest of
garments, patent-leather shoes, gold watch, bosom pin, seal ring, and
was blessed with a nice little moustache. He also smoked cigars with all
the _sang froid_ of experienced men. It might be said that he prided
himself on his style, but that was all he had for consolation, for he
was always at the foot of his class. He also showered a deal of
attention and candy on Liddy. It is needless to say the boy hated him,
and once gave him a good thrashing for calling him a "greeny." It was
true enough, but then a boy who is a greenhorn doesn't enjoy being
informed of it by a better-dressed stupid who tries to cut him out!

There was one other comfort the boy had: he was often enabled to give a
far better recitation than White could. On these occasions a faint look
of admiration in Liddy's blue eyes was like a rift of sunshine on a
cloudy day to him. When the standing of all pupils was read at the
middle of the term, the boy was away ahead of White, and felt almost as
proud as the night he walked home with Liddy from his first party. It
cheered him a deal in his hard fight against ignorance and the
awkwardness that, like hayseed from the farm, still clung to him. How
much the few quiet attentions and pleasant words Liddy favored him with
encouraged him, no one but himself ever knew. He never told Liddy even,
till a good many years after. Toward the end of the term this studious
little lady gave a party, and with the rest the boy was invited. It
gladdened his heart, of course, but when the day before the affair, and
as they were all leaving the hill upon which the academy stood, she
quietly said to him: "Come early, I want you to help me get ready to
play a new game called questions," he felt like a king. It is needless
to say he went early.

The new game proved a success. It consisted of as many numbered cards as
there were players, distributed among them by chance. The holders of
these were each in turn to give an answer to any question asked
beginning with "Who," the selection being made by the chance drawing of
one of the same series of numbers from a hat. To illustrate: If there
were thirty boys and girls playing the same game, cards bearing the
numbers from one to thirty were distributed among them.

As many more bearing the same numbers were retained by the leader, who
would start the game by asking, for instance: "Who has the largest
mouth?" A number would be drawn from the hat and the boy or girl who
held the duplicate number was by this means identified as having a
suitable mouth for pie. He or she in turn was then at liberty to get
square by asking another question also beginning with "who," and so on.

"Questions" scored a hit and made no end of fun. Some one asked: "Who is
the biggest fool in the room?" and when the number was called and Master
White proved to hold the duplicate, the boy smiled, for retribution
occasionally overtakes those who wear too fine clothes. A young folks'
party in those days would be no party at all unless there were some
kissing games, and when toward the close of this one, somebody proposed
they wind up with "Copenhagen," all seemed willing.

When the little gathering had departed, the boy made bold to stay a few
minutes longer and hold a most delightful though brief chat with Liddy.
They talked over a lot of mutually interesting subjects, including
their opinions of Mr. Webber, and if that worthy could have heard what
they said it might have reduced his bumptiousness just a trifle. Liddy
also assured the boy that she did not care a row of pins for Jim White,
and considered him too awfully stuck up for endurance, all of which,
mingled with a few sweet smiles, caused our young friend to feel that
his future life at the academy might be pleasanter for him.




CHAPTER VII.

LIDDY.


In one of the New England States, and occupying a beautiful valley
between two low ranges of mountains, was the town of Southton. One of
these ranges, that on the east, was known as the Blue Hills; the other
was nameless. This valley was about four miles in width, and winding
through it ran a small river. On the banks of this, and nearly in the
center of the town, was a village, or "town center," as it was called,
containing two churches, an academy and several stores. In one of these
churches, Rev. Jonas Jotham expounded the orthodox Congregational faith,
including predestination, foreordination, and all creation, and in the
other Rev. Samuel Wetmore argued on the same lines, clinching them all
with the necessity of total immersion as a means of salvation.

There was no affiliation between the two sects, each declaring the other
totally blind to Scriptural truths; wrong in all points of creed, and
sure to be damned for it. Sectarian feeling was strong, social lines
between the two churches were sharply drawn, and the enmities of feeling
engendered in the pulpits were reflected among the members. Each worthy
dominie emitted long sermons every Sunday, often extending to
"seventeenthly," while occasionally a few of the good deacons slept; and
so, year after year, the windy war continued.

In the meantime the children attended school, played hard, were happy,
grew up, courted, married, and kept on farming, and life in Southton
flowed onward as peacefully as the current of the river that meandered
through it.

Near the eastern border, and beside a merry brook that tumbled down from
the Blue Hill range, was the home of Loring Camp, his wife, and his only
daughter, Liddy. He was not a member of either of the two orthodox
churches, but a fearless, independent thinker, believing in a merciful
God of love and forgiveness, rather than a Calvinistic one, and who
might be classed as a Unitarian in opinion. Broad-chested, broad-minded,
outspoken in his ways, he was at once a loving husband, a kind father, a
good neighbor, an honest man and respected. Tilling a small farm and
mingling with that more or less attention to his trade of a builder, he
earned a good livelihood. A reader of the best books and a thinker as
well, he was firm in his convictions, terse in his criticism, and yet
charitable toward all. His daughter inherited her father's keen
intellect and her mother's fair face and complexion, it is needless to
say, was the pride of his heart and loved by all.

Of Liddy herself, since she is the central figure in this narrative, a
more explicit description must be given. To begin with, she was at the
age of seventeen, a typical New England girl of ordinary
accomplishments, home loving and filial in disposition, with a nature as
sweet as the daisies that grew in the green meadows about her home, and
a mind as clear as the brook that rippled through them. Fond of pretty
things in the house, a daintily set table, tidy rooms, and loving
neatness and order, she was a good cook, a capable housekeeper and a
charming hostess as well. She loved the flowers that bloomed each summer
in the wide dooryard, and had enough romance to enjoy nature's moods at
all times. She cared but little for dress and abhorred loud or
conspicuous garments of any kind. While fond of music, she never had had
an opportunity to cultivate that taste, and her sole accomplishment in
that respect was to play upon the cottage organ that stood in her
parlor, and sing a few simple ballads or Sabbath-school hymns. She was
of medium height, with a charmingly rounded figure, and blessed with a
pair of blue eyes that could change from grave to gay, from mirth to
tenderness, as easily as clouds cross the sun. With the crowning glory
of her sunny hair, a sweet and sympathetic mouth, modest and unassuming
ways, tender heart and affectionate manner, she was an unusually
attractive girl.

Of her feelings toward the boy little need be said; and since he has now
reached eighteen and a moustache, he deserves and shall have an
introduction by his name of Mr. Charles Manson. He was tall, had honest
brown eyes, an earnest manner; was unsophisticated and believed all the
world like himself, good and true. He was of cheerful temper and
generous disposition; hated shams and small conceits, and--next to
Liddy--loved the fields, the woods, and the brooks that had been his
companions since boyhood. She had known him when, at the district
school, he ignored girls; and later, as he began to bring her flag-root
in summer, or draw her on his sled in winter, she had taken more notice
of him. When he left the little brown schoolhouse for good she had
given him a lock of hair, though for what reason she could hardly tell;
and when he walked home with her from his first party she felt startled
a little at his boldness in kissing her. That act had caused a flutter
in her feelings, and though she thought none the less of him for it,
nothing would have tempted her to tell her parents about it. That
experience may be considered as the birthday of her girlish love, and
after that they were always the best of friends. He had never been
presuming, but had always treated her with a kind of manly respect that
slowly but surely had won her heart.

When they met at the academy she feared he might be too attentive, but
when she found him even less so than she expected, unknown to herself,
her admiration increased. While she gave him but little encouragement
there, still if he had paid any attention to another girl it would have
hurt her. By nature she despised any deception, and to be called a flirt
was to her mind an insult. She would as soon have been called a liar. On
the other hand, any display of affection in public was equally
obnoxious. She was loving by nature, but any feeling of that kind toward
a young man was a sacred matter, that no one should be allowed to
suspect, or at least inspect. This may be an old-fashioned peculiarity,
yet it was a part of her nature. It may seem strange, but "Charlie," as
she always called her admirer, had early discovered this and had always
been governed by it.

It is not easy to give an accurate pen-picture of a young and pretty
girl who is bright, vivacious, piquant, tender, sweet and lovable. One
might as well try to describe the twinkle of a star or the rainbow flash
of a diamond. To picture the growth of love in such a girl's heart is
like describing the shades of color in a rose, or the expression of
affection in the eyes of a dog, and equally impossible.

Liddy's home was one of the substantial, old-time kind, with tall
pillars in front, a double piazza and wide hall, where stood an ancient
clock of solemn tick. There were open fireplaces in parlor and
sitting-room, and the wide dooryard was divided by a graveled and
flower-bordered walk, where in summer bloomed syringas, sweet williams,
peonies and phlox. On either side of the gate were two immense and
broad-spreading maples. Houses have moods as well as people, and the
mood of this one was calm, cool, dignified and typical of its fairest
inmate.

When the first term of their academy life together closed, and the long
summer vacation began, Manson called on Liddy the next Sunday evening
and asked her to take a ride. He had called at various times before, but
not as though she were the sole object of his visit. This time he came
dressed in his best and as if he boldly came to woo the fair girl. All
that summer he was a regular caller, and always received the same quiet
and cordial welcome. Together they enjoyed many delightful drives along
shaded roads on pleasant afternoons or moonlit evenings, and each
charming hour only served to bind the chains of love more tightly.
Occasionally they gathered waterlilies from a mill pond hidden away
among the hills, and one Saturday afternoon he brought her to Ragged
Brook--a spot that had been the delight of his boyhood--and showed her
how to catch a trout.

The first one she hooked she threw up into the top of a tree, and as the
line was wound many times around the tip of the limb the fish had to be
left hanging there. Though almost mature in years, they were in many
ways like children, telling each other their little plans and hopes, and
giving and receiving mutual sympathy. It was all the sweetest and best
kind of a courtship, for neither was conscious that it was such, and
when schooltime came after the summer was over, the tender bond between
them had reached a strength that was likely to shape and determine the
history of their lives. How many coming heartaches were also to be woven
into the tender bond they little realized.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE HUSKING-BEE.


When David Newell, a prosperous Southton farmer living "over east," as
that portion of the town was designated, invited all the young people in
the vicinity to his annual husking-bee, every one knew that a good time
was in store. Card-playing was considered a vice in those days, and
limited to a few games of "seven-up," played by sinful boys on a
hay-mow, and dancing was frowned upon by the churches. On the outskirts
of the town a few of the younger people occasionally indulged in the
crime of taking steps to music as a change from the pious freedom of
kissing parties. There was one sacrilegious person named Joe Dencie
living in the east-side neighborhood, who could not only "make a fiddle
talk," as the saying was, but "call off" and keep time and head, foot,
both arms and entire body as well, and at once. To describe his ability
more completely it might be said that he fiddled and danced at the same
time.

When the anticipated evening came, Manson and Liddy, as well as other
invited ones, arrived at the Newell barn, where everything was in
readiness. In the center of the large floor was a pile of unhusked corn
surrounded by stools and boxes for seats, and lighted by lanterns
swinging from cords above. No time was wasted, for Joe Dencie was there,
and every one knew that the best of a husking came after the corn was
disposed of. And how the husks flew! When a red ear was found by a girl
the usual scramble occurred, for unless she could run once around the
pile before the young man who discovered it could catch her, he claimed
a kiss. Manson, who sat next to Liddy, kept a sharp watch, for he didn't
intend to have some other fellow steal a march on him. He noticed that
she husked cautiously, and when presently he saw her drop an unhusked
ear by her side he quietly picked it up and found it was a red one. He
said nothing, but her action set him to thinking. It was not long ere
the pile of corn melted away, and then the floor was swept; Joe Dencie
took his place in one corner on a tall stool, and the party formed in
two lines for the Virginia reel.

There is no modern "function" that has one-half the fun in it that an
old-time husking-bee had, and no dance that can compare with an
old-fashioned contra-dance enjoyed in a big barn, with one energetic
fiddler perched in a corner for an orchestra, and six lanterns to light
the festivities! It was music, mirth, care-free happiness and frolic
personified. The floor may have been rough, but what mattered? The young
men's boots might have been a trifle heavy, but their hearts were not,
and when it came to "balance and swing," with the strains of "Money
Musk" echoing from the bare rafters, the girl knew she had a live
fellow's arm around her waist, and not one afraid to more than touch her
fingers lest her costume be soiled. Girls didn't wear "costumes" in
those days; they wore just plain dresses, and their plump figures,
bright eyes and rosy cheeks were as charming as though they had been
clad in Parisian gowns.

When the dance was over all were invited into the house to dispose of
mince pie, cheese, doughnuts and sweet cider, and then, with the moon
silvering the autumn landscape, the party separated. As Manson drove
along the wooded road conveying Liddy to her home, he felt a little
curious. He could not quite understand why she had taken pains _not_ to
find a red ear. All the other girls had found one or more, and seemed
to enjoy the scramble that followed.

"Why did you not husk that red ear?" he asked her, after they were well
on their way.

"Simply because I do not like public kissing," she replied quietly.
"Some girls do not mind, and perhaps they like it. I do not. It cheapens
a girl in my opinion, or at least it certainly cheapens a kiss. You are
not offended, are you?" turning her face toward him.

"By no means," he answered; and then, after a pause, he added: "I think
you are right, but it seemed a little odd."

"I presume I am a little peculiar," she continued, "but to me this
public kissing at parties and huskings seems not only silly, but just a
trifle vulgar. When we were children at the district school, I thought
it was fun, but it appears different now." Then, after a pause: "If I
were a young man I would not want the girl I thought most of kissed a
dozen times by every other fellow at a party. It is customary here in
Southton, and considered all right and proper, while card-playing and
dancing are not. I would much rather play cards or dance than act like
school children."

"I most certainly agree with you, so far as the cards and dancing go,"
said Manson, "and now that you put it in the way you have, I will agree
with you regarding kissing games."

As these two young people had just entered their third year at the
academy, and Liddy was only eighteen, it may seem that she was rather
young to discuss the ethics of kissing; but it must be remembered that
she was older in thought than in years, and besides, she was blessed
with a father who had rather liberal and advanced ideas. He did not
consider card-playing at one's home a vice, or dancing a crime.

"A penny for your thoughts," said she, after they had ridden in silence
for a time, and were crossing a brook that looked like a rippling stream
of silver in the moonlight.

"I was thinking," he replied, "of a night just like this four years ago,
when I went home with you from that party at the Stillman's. It was an
event in my life that set me thinking."

"And have you been thinking about it ever since?" she said, laughing.
"If you have it must have been an important event."

"No," he answered quietly; "but if it had not been for that party, it is
likely I should not have gone to the academy, and most likely I should
not be escorting you home to-night."

"I do not quite understand you," said Liddy; and then, with an accent of
tenderness in her voice: "Tell me why, Charlie?"

"I am afraid you will laugh at me if I do," he said.

"No," she replied, "I will not; why should I?"

"Well," he continued, "to be candid, I was rather ashamed of myself that
evening, or at least ashamed of my clothes. Then you told me you were
going to the academy, and for that reason mainly I wanted to go, so you
see what resulted from my going to the party. I do not think father
intended to send me, and he would not if I had not coaxed him. My first
term there was not very pleasant for many reasons, and had I known all I
was to encounter I think my courage would have failed me. I am glad now
that it did not." He paused a moment and then continued in a lower tone:
"Whatever good it has done me is all due to you."

No more was said on the subject, and as they rode along in silence, each
was thinking of the curious web of emotions that was moulding their
lives and making definite objects grow from intangible impulses. He was
hardly conscious yet what a motive force in his plans Liddy was destined
to be; and she was filled with a new and sweet consciousness of a
woman's power to shape a man's plans in life. When her home was reached,
and after he had assisted her to alight, they stood for a moment by the
gate beneath the maples. No light was visible in the house; no sound of
any nature was heard. The sharp outlines of the buildings were softened
by the moonlight, and the bold formation of the Blue Hills, vague and
indistinct. The near-by brook, as of yore, sparkled like silver coin,
and the landscape was bathed in mellow light. As Liddy's face was turned
toward him, a ray of moonshine fell upon it, and her eyes seemed to fill
with a new tenderness. It was a time and place for loving thoughts and
words, and what these two young hearts felt called upon to utter may be
safely left to the reader's imagination.

When Manson drove away, he felt that the future was bright before him,
and that life held new and wonderfully sweet possibilities. If he built
a few air castles as he rode along in silence and alone, and if into
them crept a fair girl's face and tender blue eyes, it was but natural.
The magic sweetness of our first dreams of love come but once in their
pure simplicity; and none ever afterward seem quite like them. We may
strive to feel the same tender thrill; we may think the same thoughts
and build the same fairy palaces, woven out of moonbeams and filled with
the same divine illusions, but all in vain, for none can live life over.

When Liddy entered her home her footsteps seemed touched with a new
life. Perhaps the effect of "Money Musk" had not entirely died away.




CHAPTER IX.

GOOD ADVICE.


The next day after the husking, when Manson resumed his studies at the
academy, a new and serious ambition kept crowding itself into his
thoughts. Some definite shape of what the object of a man's existence
should be would in spite of all efforts mix itself with his algebra, and
form an extra unknown quantity, still more elusive. He tried to put it
out of his mind, but the captivating air castle would not down. Of
course Liddy formed a central figure in this phantom dwelling, and to
such an extent that he hardly dared to look at her when they met in the
recitation room for fear she would read his thoughts. Occasionally,
while studying he would steal a look across the schoolroom at her
well-shaped head with its crown of sunny hair, but her face was usually
bent over her book. She had always treated him with quiet but pleasant
friendliness at school, and he, understanding her nature by degrees,
had come to feel it would annoy her if he were too attentive. His
newborn ambition he felt must be absolutely locked in his own heart for
many years to come, or until some vocation in life and the ability to
earn a livelihood for two could be won.

For the entire week his castle building troubled him in a way, as a
sweet delusion, but a detriment to study, and then he resolved to put it
away. "It may never come, and it may," he said to himself, "but if it
does it will only be by hard work." He had never felt satisfied to
become a farmer like his father, but what else to apply himself to he
had no idea. He knew this was to be his last term at the academy, and
that he must then turn his attention to some real occupation in life. He
had been in the habit of calling upon Liddy nearly every Sunday evening
for the past year, and to look forward to it as the one pleasant
anticipation of the week. He felt she was glad to see him, and what was
of nearly as much comfort, that her father was, as well. He resolved
when a good chance came to ask Mr. Camp's advice as to some choice of a
profession.

When he called the next Sunday evening, which happened to be chilly,
Liddy met him with her usual pleasant smile and invited him into the
parlor, where a bright fire was burning. She wore a new and becoming
blue sacque, and he thought she never looked more charming. He had
usually spent part of the evenings in the sitting-room with the family,
but this time he felt he was considered as Liddy's especial company and
treated as such.

"I have noticed a cloud on your face several times the past week," she
said, as soon as they were seated. "Has your algebra bothered you, or is
the barn dance troubling your conscience?"

"I have been building foolish air castles," he replied, "for one thing,
and trying to solve a harder problem than algebra contains, for another.
The husking dance does not trouble me. I would like to go to one every
week. Do you feel any remorse from being there?"

"No," she answered, "I do not; and yet I heard this week that some one
over in town who is active in the church said it was a disgrace to all
who were there. I wish people thought differently about such things. I
enjoyed the dance ever so much, but I do not like to be considered as
acting disgracefully. Do you?"

"I presume you will be so considered," he responded, with a shade of
annoyance on his face, "if you go to dances in this town. I wish the
busybodies of that church would mind their business."

He made no further comment regarding the dance, but sat looking gloomily
at the fire.

"What ails you to-night?" asked Liddy, finally breaking the silence;
"you seem out of sorts."

"I am all right," he replied, with forced cheerfulness. "I have been
trying to solve the problem of a future vocation when I leave school
next spring, and I do not know what to do."

Liddy was silent. Perhaps some intuitive idea of what was in his mind
came to her, for, although he had never uttered a word of love to her
except by inference, she knew in her own heart he cared for her and
cared a good deal.

"Come, Charlie," she said at last, "don't worry about a vocation now.
It's time enough to cross bridges when you come to them. Do you know,"
she continued, thinking to take his mind from his troubles, "that I have
discovered why Mr. Webber does not like me? It's simply because I do not
flatter him enough. I have known for a long time I was not a favorite of
his, and now I know why. You know what a little bunch of mischief Alice
Barnes is. She whispers more than any other girl in school, and makes
more fun of him, and yet she is one of his prime favorites. Well, one
day last week, at noontime, while she was talking with three or four of
us girls, he came along, and she up and asked him if he wouldn't read
'The Raven' the next Wednesday afternoon when, you know, we all have
compositions, and then she winked at us. He took it all right, and you
ought to have heard the self-satisfied way in which he said: 'Certainly,
Miss Barnes. I shall be very happy to read it for you.' The way he
strutted across the schoolroom after that! Lida Stanton said he reminded
her of a turkey gobbler."

Manson laughed.

"Webber doesn't like me, either," he said, "and never has from the
first. I don't care. I came to the academy to learn, and not to curry
favor with him. Willie Converse is another of his pets and is cutting up
all the time, but he never sees it, or makes believe he does not."

The discussion of school affairs ended here, for even Manson's evident
dislike of the principal was not strong enough to overcome the mood he
was in. He sat in glum silence for a time, apparently buried in deep
thought, while Liddy rocked idly in her low chair opposite. The
crackling fire and the loud tick of the tall clock out in the hall were
the only sounds.

At last he arose, and going to the center table, where the lamp stood,
he took up a small daguerrotype of Liddy in a short dress, and looked at
it. The face was that of a young and pretty girl of ten, with big,
wondering eyes, a sweet mouth, and hair in curls.

"That was the way you looked," he said finally, "at the district school
the day I wrote a painful verse in your album and you gave me a lock of
hair. How time flies!"

"You are in a more painful mood to-night," responded Liddy, glad to talk
about anything. "You have the worst case of blues I ever saw;" and then
she added, after a pause, and in a low voice: "It makes me blue, too."

Manson made no reply, but sat down again and studied the fire. The
little note of sympathy in her voice was a strong temptation to him to
make a clean breast of it all; to tell her there and then how much he
loved her; what his hopes were, and how utterly in the dark he was as to
any definite plans in life. The thought made his heart beat loudly. He
looked at Liddy, quietly rocking on the opposite side of the fireplace.
A little touch of sadness had crept into her face, and the warmth of the
fire had lent an unusual color to her cheeks and a more golden gleam to
her hair. As he looked at the sweet picture his courage began to leave
him. "No, not yet," he said to himself, "she will think me a fool."

"Let's pop some corn," said Liddy suddenly, still anxious to say
anything or do anything to break what seemed to her his unhappy train of
thought; "the fire is just right."

She waited for no answer, but stepped quickly into the kitchen and
returned with a long-handled popper, three small ears of popcorn, and a
dish.

"There," she said, cheerfully, "you hold the popper while I shell the
corn. I am going to make you work now, to drive away the blues. I
believe it's the best medicine for you."

There is no doubt she understood his needs better than he supposed, for
with the popping of the corn the cloud upon his face wore away. When it
came time to go Liddy rested her hand a moment on his arm and said, in a
low voice: "Charlie, we have known each other for a good many years, and
have been very good friends. I am going to give you a little advice:
Don't borrow trouble, and don't brood over your future so much. It will
shape itself all in due time, and you will win your way as other men
have done. I have faith in you."

Her brave and sisterly words cheered him wonderfully, and when he had
gone Liddy sat down a moment to watch the dying embers. She, too, had
felt the contagion of his mood, and strange to say, his hopes and fears
were insensibly merging themselves into her own. She watched the fading
fire for a full half hour, absorbed in retrospection, and then lighting
a small lamp and turning out the large one, she walked down the hall and
upstairs to her room.

"I wish that clock wouldn't tick so loud," she thought as she reached
her door, "it makes the house sound like a tomb."




CHAPTER X.

HISTORY.


From the time Manson, as a barefooted boy, caught trout in Ragged Brook,
until the winter of '62, when, a sturdy young man of eighteen, he had
fallen deeply in love with Liddy Camp, a few changes had taken place in
Southton. Three different principals had been in charge of the academy,
one of these, a Mr. Snow, being very capable and universally popular.
Later, when Mr. Webber succeeded to that position, the question of
popularity may have been considered an open one. We must do him the
justice to say he was efficient, however, and if he had an exaggerated
idea of his own importance, it was inherited, and a failing that neither
time nor experience could eradicate.

The two worthy dominies continued to try to convert sinners by
exhaustive arguments on predestination and infant damnation, but strange
to say, made little progress. A few of the good townspeople who were not
members of either church, as well as some that were, had been for many
years reading and thinking for themselves, and had come to realize that
the dry bones of Calvinistic argument had lost their force, and that the
Supreme Being was not the merciless God the churches had for years
depicted him, but rather a Father whose love and mercy was infinite. The
then ultra-liberal Unitarian idea had begun to spread and a few who had
outgrown the orthodox religion organized a Unitarian Society, and built
a modest church to worship in. Among these pioneers in thought were
Loring Camp and Jesse Olney, the latter the author of some of the best
school-books then used; a deep thinker and a leader in town affairs.
There were other thinking men, of course, who were prominent in this new
movement, but, as this simple story is not an historical narrative,
their names need not be mentioned. This new church and its followers of
course incurred the condemnation of the other two, especially the one
led by Parson Jotham, who exhausted all argument and invective to
convince his hearers that Unitarianism and sin were synonymous terms,
and that all the new church followers were surely slated for the fiery
furnace. So vigorous were his utterances in this connection, and so
explicit his description of the fire that is never quenched and the
torture that never ends, that it was said some of his hearers could
smell brimstone and discern a blue halo about his venerable white head.
One of his favorite arguments was to describe the intense joy those who
were saved through his scheme of salvation would feel when they came to
look over the heavenly walls and see the writhing agony of all sinners
in the burning lake below. When his eloquence reached this climax he
would cease pounding his open Bible and glare over the top of his tall
pulpit at the assembled congregation, in the hope, perhaps, of
discovering among them some Unitarian sinner who could thus be made to
realize his doom.

In justice to Parson Jotham it must be said that his intentions were of
the best, no doubt, but his estimate of the motive forces of human
action was too narrow. He believed the only way to win people from vice
to virtue and good conduct was to scare them into it.

In spite of all the denunciations of the other two churches, the new
one, though feeble at first, slowly increased its following. To this one
with their respective parents, came Liddy and Manson. While perhaps not
mature enough to understand the wide distinction between Unitarianism
and Calvinism, they realized a little of the inexpressible horror of
Rev. Mr. Jotham's theories of infant damnation and the like, and were
glad to hear no more of them. Like many other young people to-day, they
accepted their parents' opinions on all such matters as best and wisest.

They were not regular in their church attendance, either, for Liddy
could not always leave her invalid mother, and occasionally she and
Manson found a drive in the summer's woods or a visit to the top of Blue
Hill more alluring than even the Unitarian church. Of similar tastes in
that respect, and both ardent admirers of nature, and loving fields and
flowers, birds and brooks, as the lovers of nature do, they often
worshipped in that broad church. Manson especially, who had from
childhood spent countless hours alone in the forests or roaming over the
hills or along the streams, had learned all the lessons there taught,
and now found Liddy a wonderfully sympathetic and sweet companion. To
spend a few quiet hours on pleasant Sundays in showing her some pretty
cascade where the foam-flecks floated around and around in the pool
below; or a dark gorge, where the roots of the trees along its bank grew
out and over the rocks like the arms of fabled gnomes, was a supreme
delight to him. He knew where every bed of trailing arbutus for miles
around could be found; where sweet flag and checkerberries grew; where
all the shady glens and pretty grottoes were, and to show her all these
charming places and unfold to her his quaint and peculiar ideas about
nature and all things that pertain to the woods and mountains delighted
his heart.

Since the evening when she had given him the wise advice not to cross
bridges till he came to them, they had grown nearer together in thought
and feeling, and whether in summer, when they drove in shady woods or
visited a beautiful waterfall, where the rising mist seemed full of
rainbows when the sun shone through it; or in winter, when they went
sleighing over the hills, after an ice storm, and were breathless with
admiration at the wondrous vision, no words or declaration of love had
as yet passed his lips. He had vowed to himself that none should until
the time came when he had more than mere love to offer. Since all his
acts and words showed her so plainly what his feelings were, she began
to realize what it must all mean in the end, and that in due time he
would ask her the one important question that contains the joy or sorrow
of a woman's life. As this belief began to grow upon her it caused her
many hours of serious thought, and had she not discovered in her own
heart an answering throb of love it is certain she was far too honorable
to have allowed his attentions to continue.

How the townspeople viewed the affair may be gathered from a remark made
by Aunt Sally Hart, the village gossip, one Sunday at church.

"They tell me," she said, "that young Manson's keeping stiddy company
with Liddy Camp, and they're likely to make a match. Wonder if they'll
go to live on his father's farm, or what he will do?"

As Aunt Sally was an estimable lady of uncertain age, who, never having
had a love affair of her own, felt a keen interest in those of others,
and as she occupied a place in Southton akin to the "personal mention"
column of a modern society newspaper, it may be said her remark was a
sufficient reflex of public opinion.

When there were any social gatherings where they were invited, he was by
tacit consent considered as her proper and accepted escort. At the
academy she had never been in the habit of discussing her private
affairs with her mates, and so perhaps was spared what might have become
an annoyance. While she listened to much gossip, she seldom repeated it,
and, by reason of a certain dignified reticence among even her most
intimate schoolgirl friends, no one felt free to tell her of the
opinions current among them regarding herself and Manson. For this
reason a little deviation from the usual rule, made one day by her
nearest friend, Emily Hobart, came with all the greater force.

"Do you know," said Emily, when they were alone, "it is common talk here
in school that you and Charlie Manson are engaged? Oh, you need not
blush so," she continued, as she saw the color rise in Liddy's face,
"everybody says so and believes it, too. Shall I congratulate you?"

This did not please Liddy at all.

"I wish everybody would mind their own business," she said with a snap,
"and leave me to mind mine."

"Oh, fiddlesticks," continued Emily; "what do you care? He is a nice
fellow, and comes of a good family. We have all noticed that he has no
eyes for any other girl but you, and never had. They say he fell in love
with you when you wore short dresses."

When Liddy went home that night she held a communion with herself. So
everybody believed it, did they? And she, in spite of her invariable
reticence, was being gossiped about, was she? "I've a good mind never
to set foot in the academy again," she said to herself.

For a solitary hour she was miserable, and then the reaction came. She
began to think it all over, and all the years she had known him from his
boyhood passed in review. And in all those years there was not one
unsightly fact, or one hour, or one word she could wish were blotted
out. And they said he had loved her from the days of short dresses!
Well, what if he had? It was no disgrace. Then pride came in and she
began to feel thankful he had, and as the recollection of it all came
crowding into her thoughts and surging through her heart, she arose and
looked into her mirror. She saw the reflection of a sweet face with
flushing cheeks, red lips, bright eyes, and--was it possible! a faint
glistening of moisture on her eyelashes!

"Pshaw," she said to herself as she turned away, "I believe I am losing
my senses."

The next two days at school she barely nodded to him each day. "At least
he shall not see it," she thought.

When the next Sunday eve came she dressed herself with unusual care, and
as it was a cold night she piled the parlor fireplace full of wood and
started it early.

Then she sat down to wait. The time of his usual coming passed, but
there was no knock at the door. The hall clock with slow and solemn tick
marked one hour of waiting, and still he did not come. She arose and
added fuel to the fire, and then, taking a book, tried to read. It was
of no use, she could not fix her mind upon anything, and she laid the
book down and, crossing the room, looked out of the window. How
cheerless the snowclad dooryard, and what a cold glitter the stars
seemed to have! She sat down again and watched the fire. The tall clock
just outside the parlor door seemed to say: "Never--never--never!"

She arose and shut the door, for every one of those slow and solemn
beats was like a blow upon her aching heart. Then she seated herself
again by the dying fire, and as she gazed at the fading embers a little
realization of what woman's love and woman's waiting means came to her.
When the room had grown chill, she lighted her lamp and retired to her
chamber.

"I have never realized it before," she said, as she looked at the sad,
sweet face in the mirror. And that night it was long ere slumber came to
her pillow.




CHAPTER XI.

WAR CLOUDS.


When Liddy reached her desk at the academy the next day she found a note
in a well-known hand that said:

"My father was very ill. I could not call last eve. I hope to next
Sunday."

It was a bitter-sweet message. At times during the week she felt her
face burn at the recollection of how disappointed she had felt the
previous Sunday eve. "I am a fool to care," she would say to herself,
and then when she caught sight of his face and saw the cloud resting
upon it she felt puzzled. She had asked regarding his father's illness
and learned he was better, so the ominous shadow was not from that
source. She felt sure it was not from an impending declaration of love
brewing in his heart, for she knew him well enough to feel that when it
came to that, he would have the manly courage to express his feelings in
his usual outspoken way.

When Sunday evening came again she awaited his coming with a new
anxiety, and when he arrived her heart felt heavy. He greeted her as
though nothing was amiss, and began chatting in an offhand manner, as if
to prevent any question from her. He even joked and told stories, but
with a seeming effort and not in accord with his feelings. Liddy watched
him quietly, feeling sure he was acting a part and for a purpose. The
more he tried to dissemble, the deeper became her dread. At last, when
the chance came, she said in her direct way:

"Charlie, you are not yourself to-night, and I believe you have some
serious trouble on your mind. I wish you would tell me what it is."

He looked at her a moment before replying, and then said:

"Oh, well, perhaps I have; but please don't notice it. I do not like to
talk of my troubles here. You will dislike me if I do."

"I shall feel hurt if you do not," she answered.

"Don't say that!" he replied; and then, after looking into her earnest
face a moment he continued in a lower tone: "You are the last person in
the world I would knowingly hurt."

He remained silent for a long time, looking at the fire in a vacant way,
and then rising suddenly he said:

"There is no use; I can't talk to-night. I am out of sorts. I think I
will go home."

"No, no, Charlie," she replied, trying hard to keep the pain out of her
voice: "don't go yet! It's too early, and we have not had a visit for
two weeks. Please sit down and tell me all about it. Can't you trust
me?"

He remained standing and looking earnestly into her upturned face and
pleading eyes for a few moments in silence; then he said:

"Yes, I can trust you, Liddy, and I am not afraid to, either! I am not
afraid to trust you with every thought and impulse that ever came to me,
but I can't bring myself to hurt you," and then he turned away.

His words almost brought the tears to her eyes, but she kept them back.
When he had his coat on and was at the door, she made one more effort.
She clasped his arm with both hands, as if to hold him, and said:

"You have made me very wretched, Charlie! Don't leave me in suspense! I
do not deserve it. No matter what it is, please tell me!"

He remained silent, but with one hand he softly caressed the two little
ones that clasped his arm. Then as her face sank slowly upon them he
stooped suddenly and kissed her hair. "When I come again you shall know
all," he whispered; "good-night!" and he tore himself away.

The meadows were growing green and the first spring violets were in
bloom ere he called again.

To explain his strange mood a little history must be inserted here.

The summer and fall of '61 and the winter and spring of '62 were
momentous in the annals of Southton. Fort Sumter had been fired upon,
and the war for the preservation of the Union had begun. The President's
first call for volunteers had been issued; the Bull Run retreat had
occurred, and the seven days' horror of the Chickahominy swamp, followed
by the battle of Fair Oaks and the siege of Fredericksburg, had startled
the country. Secession was rampant, and Washington was threatened. The
second call for volunteers had come and the entire North was alarmed.

In the spring of '62 came the third call, and by that time the spirit of
patriotism was spreading over Southton. Captain Samuel Woodruff, a born
soldier and a brave man, began to raise a company in that town. It did
not require a great effort, for the best and bravest of her sons rallied
to his call. This spirit even reached the oldest of the academy boys,
and was the cause of Manson's strange reticence with Liddy. Among his
mates were many who openly asserted their intention to enlist. Before
and after school and at noon it was talked about. Some were, like
Manson, the sons of peaceful tillers of the soil, and others the sons of
tradesmen, but all were animated by the same patriotic spirit and that
was to defend their country in her hour of danger. The example of a few
became contagious, and seemed likely to affect all the young men of the
academy of suitable age. In fact it did, for out of about thirty that
were old enough, eighteen finally enlisted and went to war. Were it not
that a list of their names is not pertinent to the thread of this
narrative, that roll of honor should be inserted here, for it deserves
to be; but it is not necessary. It is well known in Southton, and there
the names of those young heroes will never be forgotten.

For weeks while the fever of enlistment was spreading, Manson had passed
through serious mental torture. To sign the possibly fatal roll or not
to sign was the question! He dared not tell Liddy; he dared not tell his
parents. An only son, and one whom he knew his father loved, he felt
torn by conflicting duty. Never in his simple life had he passed through
such a struggle. Perhaps pride and the example of his mates were strong
factors in bringing him to a decision, but he reached one at last, and
upon a Saturday during the latter part of April he quietly wrote his
name upon the enlistment paper in Captain Woodruff's office, and the
deed was done.

In the meantime, and for the few weeks in which he did not call, Liddy
lived in an agony of suspense. She knew what was going on, for it was
current gossip in school, and there was something in his face that
seemed to her ominous. In school she tried hard to act unconcerned, even
when, as often was the case, other girls whose young and loving hearts
were sore, gave way to tears. Each day she smiled and nodded to him as
usual; but the smile had grown pathetic, and into her eyes had crept a
look of dread. He saw it all, and hardly dared speak to her. Each Sunday
eve she dressed herself for his coming and watched the fire while the
tall clock ticked in solemn silence. She dreaded to hear her father
speak of the war news, and when at school the gossip as to who had or
who was going to enlist was referred to she walked away. She grew silent
and morose, and clouds were on her face at all times. There were plenty
of sad and worried looks on other girls' faces at school during those
weeks, so she was not alone in her gloom.

Manson had felt that deep down in her heart she cared a good deal more
for him than her conduct showed, and to tell her of his intentions
before he carried them out would be to subject her to needless days of
suspense and possibly affect his own sense of duty. Now that it was all
over, she must be the first to be told, and how much he dreaded it only
those who have passed through the same experiences can tell. He scarcely
slept at all that night, and when he presented himself at her house the
next day, just before church time, he looked pale and haggard. It was an
unusual thing for him to call at that hour, and when Liddy met him her
heart sank. Without any formality he asked her to put on her wraps and
take a ride.

"I have come to tell you all," he said, "and I can talk better away from
the house, and where we are alone."

When they were well on their way and driving along the wooded road
toward the top of one of the Blue Hills--a lookout point whence all
Southton's area could be seen--he turned his face and looked at hers for
the first time since starting. What he saw there smote his heart.

"It's a nice day for a ride, isn't it, Liddy?" he said pleasantly,
trying hard to act natural.

Her answer was peculiar.

"I can't talk of the day or anything else, Charlie, till I know the
worst. Remember, you have kept me in suspense four long, weary weeks.
Tell me now as soon as you can."

He made no reply, and spoke not another word until they reached the
lookout place. In silence he assisted her to alight, and taking the
carriage robe, he spread it upon a rock where they had often sat viewing
the landscape below. Then he said, in a low voice:

"Please sit down, Liddy. I've fixed a nice seat for you, and now I can
talk to you."

Then their eyes met for the second time since starting. Her face and
lips were pale, and her eyes full of fear. She clasped her hands before
her face as if to ward off the coming blow.

"Tell me now," she said hurriedly, "tell me the worst, only tell me
quickly! I've suffered long enough!"

He looked at her a moment pityingly, dreading to deal the blow, and
trying to frame it into suitable words--and then it came.

"Liddy," he said in a husky whisper, "I love you, and I've enlisted!"

A brief sentence, but what a message!

A woman's heaven and a woman's hell in six words!

For one instant she looked at him, until its full force came to her and
then she burst into tears, and the next moment she was in a heap on the
robe-covered rock and sobbing like a child. Instantly he was beside her,
gathering her in his arms and kissing her hair, her tear-wet face and
lips. Not a word was spoken; not one was needed! He knew now that her
heart was his, and for weal or woe; for joy or sorrow, their lives must
be as one.

"Don't cry any more, my darling," he whispered at last. "I shall come
back all safe, and then you will be my wife, won't you, Liddy?"

She made no answer, but a small, soft hand crept into one of his, and he
knew his prize was won.

When they were ready to leave the hallowed spot she gathered a bunch of
the spring violets growing there, and kissing them, handed the cluster
to him in silence.

Late that evening when they parted she put one arm caressingly about his
neck and whispered: "Give me all the hours you can, Charlie, before you
must go; they may be all we shall ever have together."




CHAPTER XII.

A DAY IN THE WOODS.


When schoolmates who have studied and played together until almost
maturity reach the parting of their ways a feeling of sadness comes to
them; but when out of such a band there are eighteen of the best young
men about to take part in the horror of war, the occasion becomes doubly
so. The last few weeks passed together by the graduating pupils of
Southton Academy came back to them in after years much like the memory
of a funeral. There were no frolics at noontime or after school; no
mirth and scant laughter.

A few of the girls were known to be carrying aching hearts, and it was
whispered that two or three were engaged to be married to young
soldier-boys now in the academy. Liddy wore a new and heavy plain gold
ring, and when questioned as to its significance quietly answered, as
was her wont: "I have no confessions to make," but those who were
nearest to her and knew her best detected a proud look in her eyes and
drew their own conclusions. It was noticed also that she and Manson were
seldom apart during the noon hour, and invariably walked away from the
academy together. As there were other couples who thus paired off it
caused no comment.

When the last day came the academy was packed with the parents and
friends of pupils, and on Liddy's desk was a bunch of June roses. She
knew whose hand had placed them there. When the final exercises began
she felt herself growing nervous. She had never felt so before, but now
the mingled joy and sorrow of the past four weeks were telling upon her.
There were several patriotic and warlike recitations by the young men,
and readings of an unusually melancholy nature by young ladies, all of
which tended to make matters worse, so that when her turn came she felt
ready to cry. But she caught a look from Manson that was like wine. "He
has been brave," she thought; "I will be as much so"--and she was.

When the exercises were over the principal made a brief but feeling
address which raised him several degrees in Manson's estimation, and
that was the end. Most of the pupils lingered, loth to utter the last
farewells, but finally they were spoken, and with many moist eyes among
that gathering of young friends they separated. Some of them never met
in life again.

The few remaining evenings ere Liddy and her lover were to part were not
wasted by them, and the last Sunday was one long to be remembered.

"Come early," she had said the night before; "I have a little surprise
for you." When he arrived at her house that day, just as the distant
church bells were faintly calling, he found her dressed for a ride, and
was a little puzzled.

"I want you to take me to church to-day," she said, smiling, and then
added, in a low voice, "to our church on the top of Blue Hill, where
there will be no one but God and ourselves."

It was an odd thought, and yet, knowing her as he did, it was not
surprising. The simple reverence of it touched him, however.

"Now," she continued more cheerfully, "no more sober thoughts. Let us
try and be happy, and like children once more. Here is a basket I have
packed, and you are to put it in the carriage. We are to dine in the
woods."

The day was one of those rare ones that come only in June, and when they
reached the spot, now, henceforth and forever sacred to them, the
sheltering trees were fresh with new foliage, the birds singing while
building their nests, the summer breeze softly whispering in the
scattered hemlocks, and over all shone the mellow sunshine.

For a long time they sat on the rock, now hallowed by her tears, viewing
the beautiful landscape spreading out below and living over, as they had
many times before, and as young lovers will, all the little incidents of
their lives, and what a marvelous thing it was that they had come to
love each other. It was all a story as old as the rock upon which they
sat, and pure and sweet as the blue violets blooming at their feet. In
the midst of it Manson pointed to a spot in the valley below--a cedar
pasture with an immense boulder in the middle--and said: "Once upon a
time, several years ago, when I was a boy, I was picking berries in that
field, when a little girl in short dress and calico sun-bonnet came
running down a path near me until, almost at my feet, she stumbled, and
girl, berries and bonnet went sprawling upon the ground! Can you guess
who it was?"

Liddy turned her face toward him and smilingly answered: "Was that the
way I entered your heart, Charlie? It wasn't a dignified way, was it?"

"It was at least effective," he replied, "for you have remained in it
ever since."

When the sun was high overhead she arose and said, with bewitching
imperiousness: "Now, sir, you have been idle long enough; you must help
me set the table. Bring me that basket in the carriage."

"If we are to begin keeping house up here," he answered cheerfully,
"perhaps you had better wait till I build you a table."

"I shall be glad if you can," she said, and watched him curiously while
he cut small, straight sticks, and then larger ones with forked ends.
These he drove into the ground under a tree, and placing one stout stick
to connect each of the forked ones and form supporting ends, laid the
others across and close together to make the table. He then placed flat
stones for seats, covering them with the carriage cushions, and when all
was done he said: "My dear, your table is ready; now I will help you to
set it."

"I am glad I brought a tablecloth," she remarked smiling.

When the dainty little banquet board, just large enough for two, was
covered with a snow-white spread and napkins, plates, knives and forks,
and all the attractive results of her culinary art, he smiled, for the
tempting food would make any hungry man smile.

"It's not an elaborate dinner," she remarked, as they sat down, "but you
must get used to my cooking some time, and you might as well begin now."

When the sun was low in the west and she sat near him idly weaving
flowers into the band of his hat, he said: "Liddy, have you never
wondered how I am going to solve the vocation problem I used to worry
about?"

"No," she answered quietly, "and I do not wish to discuss it, either.
Remember, we are children to-day." Then she continued, in a lower tone:
"I have trusted you with my heart, my life, and all the happiness I can
ever hope for, and when the time comes I know you will not fail me."

"I realize what it all means," he answered, after a long pause, "and you
can trust me, for so long as God gives me strength you shall have all
the blessings I can win in life."

They sat in silence until the lowering sun had left the valley in shadow
and smiled only on the hilltop where they lingered. Perhaps the dread
parting that was near seemed creeping toward them with the shades of
night, for his arm stole softly about her waist, and her hand crept
into his. They watched until the last ray of sunlight had vanished, and
when they arose he once more gathered her close in his arms and
whispered:

"Promise me, my darling, that if I never come back you will visit this
spot alone, once a year, in June, and if there be such a thing as a life
beyond the grave, I will be here in spirit."

"I promise," she answered solemnly, "and no man shall ever have the
right to stop me."

When they were ready to leave the place he had to lead her to the
carriage, for her eyes were blinded by tears.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE GIRL I LEFT BEHIND ME.


With bayonets flashing in the sunlight, with flags flying and keeping
step to the martial music, Southton's brave Company E marched full one
hundred strong to the depot the next day, ready to leave for the war.

Almost the entire town was there to see them off, and hundreds of men,
old and young, filled the air with cheers. Mingling in that throng were
as many mothers, wives, sweethearts and sisters with aching hearts,
whose sobs of anguish were woven into the cheering. Strong men wept as
well. As the train rolled away, Manson fought the tears back that he
might not lose the last sight of one fair girl whose heart he knew was
breaking. When it was all over, and he realized that for months or
years, or perhaps never, would he behold her again, he knew what war and
parting meant. He had obeyed his conscience and sense of duty, and now
he must pay the price, and the payment was very bitter. Of his future
he knew not, or what it might hold for him. He could only hope that when
his hour of trial came that he would not falter, and if the worst must
come that he would find strength to meet it as a soldier should.

War is such a ghastly, hideous horror, and so utterly at variance with
this simple narrative, that I hesitate to speak of it. There can be no
moments of happiness, no rifts of sunshine, and but few gleams of hope
woven into the picture. All must be as war is--a varying but continued
succession of dreaded horror and the fear of death. The first month of
Manson's experience at the training camp was hard only in anticipation,
and but a daily round of duty easily performed and soon passed. Liddy's
frequent letters, each filled with all the sweet and loving words that,
like flowers, naturally spring from a woman's heart, cheered him
greatly; but when the order came to go to the front, the scene changed,
and the reality of war came. He dreaded the first shock, not so much
from fear of death; but lest his courage fail. When it came at
Chancellorsville it was all over before he knew it. Although under fire
for eight hours, he was not conscious of the lapse of time or aught
else, except that he obeyed orders and loaded and fired with the rest;
forgetting that he might fall, or whether he was brute or human. That
night he wrote to Liddy: "We have had our first battle, and for many
hours I forgot even you. I know now that I shall not falter. Poor
Luzerne Norton, one of our academy boys, was killed, also three others
from our company; and seven were wounded."

When the letter reached Liddy her heart sank. To know that one of her
bright and happy schoolmates of a few months before had been shot and
killed, and others wounded, was to have the dread reality of war brought
very near home. "Thank God my boy was spared," she thought. That night
she wrote him the most loving letter he had ever received, concluding
with: "Be brave, my darling, and always remember that come what may I
shall keep my promise."

Then came the battle of Gettysburg, and although his company escaped
with only a few wounded, it was here he first realized the ghastly
horror of a battlefield after the fight is over, and how the dead are
buried.

When his next letter reached the sad-hearted one at home, no mention was
made of this experience, and when she wrote asking why he had never
told her how a battleground looked, or anything about it, he replied:
"Not for worlds would I tell you how we bury the dead, or how they
looked, or anything of the sickening details. Please do not read them in
the papers, for it will do you no good, and cause you needless
suffering. I wish to keep misery from you. Think of me only as doing my
duty, and try to believe (as I do) that I shall come back to you alive
and well."

For the next six months he had no battles to face--only skirmishing and
picket duty. When Christmas came it brought him two boxes of good things
to gladden his heart. One was from his dear old mother, and one was from
Liddy, and tucked away in that, between four pairs of blue socks knit by
her fair hands, was a loving letter and a picture of herself.

Almost a month after came the battle of Tracy City and the fall of brave
Captain Upson. There were others wounded, but none of his company were
killed. It was here Manson received his first promotion to a corporal's
position, and he was afterward made sergeant. In the spring that
followed, and almost one year from the day he first told Liddy of his
love, came the battle of Boyd's Trail. Five days after, when the moon
was full one night, he wrote by the light of a camp fire: "Do you
remember one year ago to-day, and where we were and what I said? I little
realized that day what was in store for me. One thing I must tell you,
however, and that is you can never know how much comfort it has been to
me to live over all the happy hours we have had together. Every little
word and look of love from you has come back to me again and again in my
long, lonesome hours of picket duty, and to-night as I sit by the camp
fire and see the moon shining through the trees I can recall just how I
felt the first time I kissed you, when the same moon seemed to be
laughing at me. Do you remember one night when we were driving across
the plains on our way back from a little party over to Marion, and you
sang that 'Meet Me by Moonlight' ballad? That was three years ago, and
yet I can almost hear your voice now."

When this letter reached Liddy she read it in tears.

For the next year it was with Manson as with all that slowly decreasing
company--one unending round of nervous strain, long marches, sharp
fighting, or, worse yet--carrying the wounded from the battlefield and
burying the dead. They lived poorly, slept on the ground or in the mud
at times, and became accustomed to filth and stench, indifferent to
danger and hardened to death. When a comrade fell those who knew him
best said: "Poor fellow, he's gone," and buried him without a prayer;
but the dead who were personally unknown awakened no more feeling than
so many leaves fallen by the wayside. It could not well be otherwise,
for such is war. Individual cases of heroism were common enough, and
passed almost unnoticed; for they were all brave men who came to fight
and die if need be, and no less was expected.

War makes strange bedfellows, and forms unexpected friendships. It was
after the battle of Gettysburg, when the Tenth Army Corps remained in
camp for several months, and one night while on picket duty, that Manson
met with a curious adventure, and made the acquaintance of a
fellow-soldier by the name of Pullen, belonging to a Maine regiment,
whose existence, and the tie thus formed, eventually led to a sequence
of events of serious import. The enemy were encamped but a few miles
away, and that most dastardly part of warfare, the firing upon pickets
from ambush, was of nightly occurrence. Manson's beat that night was
over a low hill covered with scrub oak, and across part of a narrow
valley, through which wound a small, marsh-bordered stream. The night
was sultry, and the dampness of the swamp formed in a shallow strata of
fog, filling this valley, but not rising above the level of the uplands.
To add to the weirdness of his surroundings, the thin crescent of a new
moon threw a faint light over all and outlined the winding turns of this
mist-filled gorge. Away to the northward a belt of dark clouds emitted
frequent flashes of heat lightning, and occasional sharp reports along
the line bespoke possible death lurking in every thicket. Keeping always
in shadow, and oft pausing to listen, Manson slowly traversed his beat,
waiting only at either end to exchange a whispered "All's well!" with
the next sentry.

What a vigil! And what a menace seemed hidden behind every bush or spoke
in every sound! The faint creak of a tree as the night wind stirred the
branches; the rustle of leaves on the ground or the breaking of a twig
as some prowling animal moved about; the flight of a bird, disturbed at
its rest; the hoot of an owl on the hillside or the croak of a frog in
the swamp were all magnified tenfold by the half-darkness and the sense
of danger near. One end of his beat ended at the brook and here he
waited longest, for the sentry he met there was, like himself, hardly
out of his teens, and unused to war. A bond of fellowship sprang into
existence almost at sight, and made them brothers in feeling at once.

It was while whispering together beside this brook, and oppressed by the
suspense of night and danger near, that they detected a sound of more
than usual ill-omen, and that, the certain one that some creature had
stepped into the stream above, and was cautiously and slowly wading in
it. Hardly breathing, and bending low, the better to catch every sound
that came, they listened with beating hearts until it ceased. Once they
had detected the click of stones striking together as if moved by a
human foot and twice caught the faint plash of a bush or limb of tree
dropping into the water. Then the sounds ceased, and only the faint
murmur of that slow-running stream disturbed the silence.

For a few moments they waited there, and then together crept up out of
the gorge. Just as they emerged from the pall of the fog, and where the
moon's thin disk still outlined that narrow white-blanketed valley, they
paused, looking across, above, below and all around, and listening as
intently as two human beings so environed would when believing danger
near. And as they looked and listened for moments that seemed hours,
suddenly, scarce five rods away, they saw a man slowly emerged from the
bush-covered bank, rapidly cross this narrow gorge, apparently walking
on the fog, and disappear in the dark thicket on the other side!

Forgetting in the first shock of supernatural added to natural fear that
they stood fully exposed in the faint moonlight, they looked at each
other, while a cold chill of dread seemed to check even the power to
think. Manson was the first to recover, and with a quick, "We must
hide," almost hissed, dropped on all fours behind a bush, followed by
his comrade. That the motion betrayed them to watchful eyes is certain,
for the next instant, out from the dark thicket across the gorge there
leaped a flash of red fire, and the ping of a bullet, cutting leaves and
twigs above them, told its own tale. Too scared to think of returning
the fire, or conscious that to do so was unwise, they slowly crawled
deeper into the scrub and along the top of the hillock. All that night
they kept together, and how long it was until the gray light of coming
dawn lifted a little of their burden of fear, no one who has never
skulked along a picket line in darkness and dread can imagine!

When the relief guard came, Manson and his mate tried to discover where
their night-prowling enemy had crossed that narrow gorge, if he had
crossed at all, but could not. Whether ghost, or shadow, or
flesh-and-blood enemy had walked on fog in the faint moonlight before
them, they could not tell, and never afterward were they able to
determine. The only certain fact was that some one had fired at them,
and fired meaning to kill! Wisely, too, they agreed to keep the ghost
part of that experience a secret, and none of their comrades ever knew
they had seen a man walking upon the fog.




CHAPTER XIV.

BESIDE THE CAMP FIRE.


Both Manson's and Pullen's regiments were encamped along the edge of a
belt of pine woods, and after their creepy experience together on picket
duty, they naturally sought each other as often as possible. There is a
'witching romance lingering about a camp fire in the woods that
stimulates the imagination, and when these two newly made friends could
meet for an evening's visit beside theirs, many a tale of youthful
experience and boyish escapade was exchanged.

"Speaking of ghosts," said Manson, one evening, "I do not believe in
their existence exactly, and yet there is a strange fascination about
the idea that I can't understand. Now I do not believe we saw a man
walking on fog the other night, and yet I can't resist the desire to
hunt the matter out and discover what sort of an optical illusion it
was. I am not at all certain the man who took a shot at us was the one
we saw across the ravine, either. I had an experience once when I was
about nine years old, that, in a way, tainted my mind with the ghost
idea, and perhaps that is the reason why the possibility of seeing one
affects me in the way it does. A couple of miles from the farm where I
was reared there stood an old deserted ruin of a house known as the Tim
Buck place. It was hidden away behind hills and woods and reached from
the highway through a half-mile lane, thick grown with bushes. Here,
years before I was born, there had once lived a man by the name of Buck,
who hanged himself in the garret one day, while his wife was away. It
was said she came back just at dusk and found him hanging lifeless from
a rafter in the garret. What became of her I never knew, but no one ever
lived on the place afterward, and in time the farm and house reverted to
the town for taxes. It also soon obtained the reputation of being
haunted, and no one ever went near it after dark. A couple of 'coon
hunters told how they had taken refuge in it from a sudden shower at
night, but left in a hurry when they heard some one walking on the
chamber floor above. Some one else said they had seen a white figure
walking on the ridge-pole just at dusk. All this was current gossip in
the town, and believed by many.

"My parents had sense enough not to tell me, but when I was old enough
to be sent to the district school, I heard all this, and more, too; and
the worst of it was I believed all I heard. I had never been near the
house, but when I heard the stories, I got another boy for company and
went to look at it from the top of a near-by hill. As I grew older the
fascination of the place kept increasing, and one day it overcame my
fear and all alone I paid it a visit.

"The house was a ruin--roof fallen in, floor rotted away and pitched
into the cellar: only the walls were standing, and the beams and
rafters, like the ribs of a skeleton, still in place. I remember the
well-sweep was in the usual position, and seemed to me like a warning
finger pointing at the bleaching rafters. It took me a good half hour to
muster courage enough to go within ten rods of the ruin, but I finally
did, and at last, scared half to death, and trembling, found myself
peeping in at one window. It was dark in there and smelt queer, and I, a
nine-year-old boy, fully expected to see some new and horrible spook
appear at any moment. How long I stood there I never knew, for I forgot
all else except the belief that if I waited long enough I should see
something queer. I did, too, for all at once I saw in an inner room,
where a closet door stood half open, a white, bony hand reach out from
behind it, take hold, and seemingly shut that door from the inside! I
didn't wait any longer, you may be sure, and never stopped running until
I came in sight of home, two miles away!"

"And didn't you ever go back there?" said Pullen, "when you got older?"

"Oh, yes, I did, but not for a year after, and during that year I
dreamed of that house and one or a dozen skeleton hands, countless
times. Finally I mustered up spunk, went there one day all alone, set
the old ruin on fire, and then ran as fast as my legs would carry me to
a hilltop half a mile away, and stood and watched the fire. The place
was so hidden away no one saw it burn except me, and I never told for
fear of consequences."

"And did you ever outgrow the belief that you really saw a skeleton hand
open that door?" said Pullen, reaching forward to pick up an ember and
light the pipe he had just refilled.

Manson was silent for a few moments, as he lay resting his head on one
hand and watching the firelight play hide-and-seek among the pine boughs
overhead.

"No, to tell you the truth, Frank," he replied at last, slowly, "I do
not think I ever did. Of course, I know I did not see what I thought I
did, and yet I have not quite outgrown the scare. I won't admit that I
believe in ghosts, and yet the thought of them, owing perhaps to that
boyhood fright, has a sort of deadly fascination for me. I believe and
yet I do not believe, and if I were told I could see one by going
anywhere, no matter how grewsome the spook was, I could not resist
going."

"You ought to have lived where I came from," observed Pullen, looking
curiously at his comrade; "for about twenty miles from my home is an
island known as 'The Pocket,' that is fairly swarming with ghosts."

"Tell me about it," said Manson, suddenly interested.

"Well, it is a long yarn," replied Pullen, "but, from your make-up, the
island is just such a spot as you would enjoy visiting. As I told you
the other night, I was born and brought up on an island off the coast of
Maine, and when I was quite a lad I first heard about this island, and
that no one ever went there because it was haunted. I wasn't old enough
to understand what being haunted meant, but later on I did. They used to
tell about it being a hiding-place for smugglers before I was born, and
that a murder had been committed there and that some one in a fishing
boat had seen a man fully ten feet tall, standing on a cliff on it, one
night. Dad, who was a sea captain, used to laugh at all this, and yet
almost everybody believed there was some mystery connected with it.
Another thing, I guess, helped give it a bad name was the fact that a
ship was wrecked on it once, and no one discovered it until long after,
and then they found four or five skeletons among the rocks. Another
queer thing about this island that is really a fact is, that any time,
day or night, you can hear a strange, bellowing sound like that of a mad
bull, coming from somewhere on it. When there is a storm you can hear it
for miles away. The sound can't be located anywhere, and yet you can
hear it all the time. If you are one side, it seems to come from the
other, and go around to that side and it is back where you came from.
Inside the island is a circular pocket or walled-in harbor, like the
crater of a volcano, that is entered through a narrow passage between
two cliffs. Altogether it's a curious place, but as for ghosts--well,
I've been there many a time and never saw one yet. But then, I do not
believe in spooks, and perhaps that accounts for it. It's like the
believers in spiritualism, that can readily see their dead ancestors'
faces peering out of a cabinet, and all that sort of bosh, but I never
could. I'll bet," with a laugh, "that you could go to Pocket Island and
see ghosts by the dozen."

"I would like to go there," replied Manson quietly, "and if we ever get
home alive, I will."

"Come and make a visit, and I'll take you there," said Pullen; "that is"
(soberly) "if I ever go home."

The story-telling ceased while the two friends, each thinking of the
same thing, gravely watched the slowly fading fire.

"Come," said Pullen at last, "quit thinking about what may happen, and
tell me another ghost story. It's your turn now."

But Manson was silent, for the story-telling mood had fled, and his
thoughts were far away.

"Where are you now?" continued Pullen, studying his comrade's face.
"With some girl, I'll bet; am I right?"

"Yes," answered Manson slowly, "I was with some one just then, and
thinking of a fool promise I exacted from her before I left, and all
this ghost-story telling has made me realize what an injury I may have
done her by exacting that promise."

"Tell me," said Pullen, "I can sympathize with you, for I, too, have a
girl I left behind me."

"Well," came the answer slowly, "this girl has too much good sense to
believe in ghosts, and yet, you can't ever tell who does or does not
believe in them. The foolish part of it is that I took her to a lonely
spot away in the woods one day, before I left, and asked her to promise
me that in case I never came back she would visit this spot alone once a
year, on that same day, and if I was in spirit I would appear to her, or
at least if there was any such thing as spirit life, I would be there,
too. She is one of those 'true blue' girls would keep such a promise as
long as she lived, I think; and now you understand what a fool promise
it was."

"I can't dispute you," answered Pullen, and then they separated.




CHAPTER XV.

MYSTERIES.


"Do you know, Frank," said Manson, a week later, as once more the two
lounged beside their camp fire, "that I have the hardest kind of a task
to keep myself from believing in omens, and especially the 'three
warnings' business? Now, to illustrate, we lost a man out of our company
two nights ago, and he was shot within ten feet of where you and I stood
the night we were shot at. His name was Bishop, and an old schoolmate of
mine. I was on the morning guard-mount detail, and was the first one to
see him as we were going along the picket line. He had been shot in the
head, and most likely never knew what hit him. To make the fate of
Bishop more impressive his going on for night duty instead of myself had
been decided by chance."

"Well, what of it?" said Pullen. "It was his bad luck and not yours that
time, wasn't it? That fact ought to drive away your presentiments
instead of increasing them, my boy."

"Perhaps, and yet it doesn't," replied Manson. "It keeps crowding me
into the belief that I am booked for the same fate in the near future,
and, do all I can, I can't put that idea away."

"Nonsense," put in Pullen, "that is all bosh, and in the same list with
the Friday business, and seeing the moon over your left shoulder, and
all that string of superstition that has come down to us, or rather, up
to us from the Dark Ages, when mankind believed in no end of hobgoblin
things."

"Say, Frank, don't you believe in luck?" interposed Manson. "Don't you
believe there is such a thing as good or ill luck in this world, and
that one or the other follows us most of the time all through life?"

"Yes, to a certain extent I do," answered Frank. "But I've noticed that
good luck comes oftenest to those who put forth the greatest effort, and
ill luck is quite apt to chase those who are seemingly born tired."

Manson was silent, for the wholesome optimism of his friend went far to
dispel his grewsome imaginings.

"How does a mystery you can't understand affect you, Frank?" he said at
last.

"Oh, as for that, if I can't find some solution for it easily I put it
away and think of some other matter. Life is too short to waste in
trying to solve all we can't understand. And speaking of mysteries,"
continued Frank, "you ought to have been born and brought up where I
was, on an island off the coast of Maine. There is more mystery to the
square mile down that way, I believe, than anywhere else in the world,
unless it be Egypt. There is a little village called Pemaquid, where
they fence it in and charge an admission. I know of a dozen places where
there are old Indian villages; old fort sites; old burial-places that
fairly bristle with mystery! If you go anywhere near them the natives
will ask you to go and look at this spot, or that, and act as if they
expected you to take off your hat while they tell all about it in an
awed whisper. Oh, we have mystery to burn down in Maine! Maine would
just suit you, Manson! There isn't an island on the coast, a lake or
mountain in the interior that hasn't got a fairy tale, or some legend
connected with it. You remember what I told you about Pocket Island the
other night? Well, that is a fair sample. And speaking of fairy tales,
there is a curious one current down our way about a Jew and an Indian
who were known to be smugglers and came and went in a mysterious way.
They sailed a small sloop called the Sea Fox, and, according to the
stories, this Jew was one of the most adroit villains ever born with a
hooked nose. Where he hailed from the devil only knew, and he never
told, and when after he had mystified everybody for two years, smuggled
liquor by the boatload all the time without getting caught once, he
mysteriously disappeared, and left the entire coast guessing. According
to the stories, and there are hundreds told about him, he was the
smoothest Sheeney that ever swore by Moses. Dozens of constables were on
the watch for him; his sloop was searched many times; every one believed
he was smuggling liquor all the time and yet no one ever caught him. All
this happened when I was a boy, and yet to-day no one sees a small
tops'l sloop gliding into some uninhabited cove that they don't say
'There goes the Sea Fox.'"

"And did no story ever crop out regarding what became of him, or where
he went to?" inquired Manson.

"Not a word or whisper; that is where the mystery lies, and, as I said,
it is one more added to the large stock we already have."

"I would love to spend a month down your way, Frank," said Manson, after
a pause.

"And why not?" replied Pullen. "I've a good boat, plenty of time, and
when we get out of this scrape I would be more than glad to have you
visit me. I will take you all around among the islands and show you all
the mysteries, even Pocket Island, and who knows but we may run across
the Sea Fox? Promise me to come, will you?"

"Yes, if ever I get back alive I will," answered Manson.

It was not long after this pleasant chat that there occurred another
episode in Manson's war experience that had a peculiar effect upon his
imagination, and one that perhaps will illustrate the pathos of war as
well as any.

"We do not pause to think what we are about to do when we are marched
into battle," he said to his friend Frank the day after it happened; "we
are under orders to kill if we can, and the smell of smoke, the roar of
guns, and the awful horror of it all deadens every sense except the
brutal one to shed blood. But to deliberately shoot an enemy, even
though you know he is only waiting to shoot you, is another matter. I
had to do it yesterday morning, however, and how miserable I have been
ever since, no one can imagine. As you know, the Rebs have been shooting
pickets off and on, for two weeks, and orders have been issued to shoot
at sight and ask no questions. I had been on the line all night and was
so dead tired and worn out with the nervous strain that I was ready to
lie down in the mud even, and go to sleep, when just at daylight I saw a
man crawling on all fours across an open space maybe twenty rods away,
and across a ravine.

"It was a little lighter up where he was and I knew he couldn't see me.
I lay low behind a rock and watched him, and as it grew lighter saw he
wore gray, and I knew he was an enemy. For ten minutes he never moved,
and I lay there with a bead on him trying to decide what to do. I knew
he was there to kill, and that my duty was to shoot, and yet I
hesitated. We shoot in battle not really knowing whether we kill or not,
but to deliberately pull trigger knowing it means sending a human soul
into eternity is an awful thing to do. His own action decided the
matter, for, as I saw him lift himself a little and then raise his gun
to the shoulder, I fired. Then I saw him spring to his feet, whirl
around, clasp his hands to his breast and slowly sink forward half out
of sight. I put a fresh cartridge in, and then never took my eyes off
that gray heap until the relief guard came along. He was not quite dead
when we went to him, for the ball had gone through his lungs, and he was
fighting hard for breath. He was a beardless boy, not over eighteen, and
as he gasped, the blood gushed out of his mouth. We saw him try to
speak, but could not, and then he looked at us three; first one and then
another. It must be he saw more pity in my face than in the others, for
the poor boy suddenly reached out his hand toward me, and as I took it
he drew me down to try and whisper to me. It was of no use; I could not
catch the sound.

"I wiped the blood away from his lips and then rolled my blouse up for a
pillow and laid his head on it. I could see a mute look of gratitude in
his eyes, like those of a dying dog, and, mingling with that, the awful
fear of death. It was all over in a few moments, and at the last he drew
my hand to his lips and kissed it. The other two boys turned away, and I
was glad, for the tears were chasing each other down my face. The one
bit of consolation I had was, the poor boy did not know I shot him. When
it was all over, we left him, and later we three went up there and
buried him beside the rock where he died. I saw his face hovering over
me all last night, and it will haunt me as long as I live."




CHAPTER XVI.

THE GRASP OF DEATH.


When the fierce heat of E Company's second summer in an almost tropical
climate was fast depleting their ranks, Manson wrote to Liddy:

"Disease among us is more dangerous than rebel bullets. When I was a boy
I used to feel that the long, hot hours in hay fields, or the bitter
cold ones in the snow-buried woods, were severe hardships, but now I
thank God for them! If I survive the exposure here it will be because of
the splendid health and strength that came to me from those days on the
farm. Sometimes when the miserable food I have to eat, or the vile water
I must drink, is at its worst, I think of what mother used to cook, and
how sweet the water in dear old Ragged Brook used to taste on a hot
summer day, and you cannot imagine what I would give for a chance to
thrust my face into that cool stream, where it was leaping over a mossy
ledge, and drink my fill.

"I have passed through some ghastly and sickening experiences, too
horrible to relate to you, and at times I am so depressed that I lose
all hope, and then again I feel that I shall pull through all right. One
thing I want you to do, and that is, forget the foolish promise I
exacted from you that day on Blue Hill. Some things have occurred that
have convinced me it was doing you a cruel injustice to ask such a
promise."

It was the last letter Liddy ever received from her soldier boy, and
when she read it it filled her with a new and uncanny dread.

During those first two years of service, E Company made heroic history.
They took part in eleven hard-fought battles, besides many skirmishes,
and not a man flinched or shirked a duty! They were all hardy sons of
old New England, who, like their forefathers of '76, fought for home and
liberty; for freedom and love of country. Such, and such only, are true
heroes!

Of the battles in which they took part, now famous in history,
Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, Tracy City, Resaca, Peach Creek and
Atlanta were the most severe, though many others were as sanguinary.
Their losses in all these engagements were sixteen officers, killed or
wounded in battle, and twenty-three privates, or total of thirty-nine.
In addition, eight were taken prisoners, most of whom died in rebel
prison pens; and thirty-six others died of disease or were disabled by
it. Out of the one hundred hardy men who left Southton, only nineteen
returned unharmed at the close of the war!--a record for brave service
that was not surpassed, and one that should weave a laurel wreath around
every name!

Manson had passed through eight battles unharmed and dread disease had
failed to touch his splendid strength; but at the battle of Peach Creek,
and under a blazing July sun he fell. His regiment had been ordered to
charge a hill, from the top of which a perfect storm of rebel bullets
were pouring upon them, and with hands gripping his gun and teeth
fiercely set, he with the rest faced the almost certain death as they
charged up the hill! When half way up, and just as he had leaped a low
stone wall, two red-hot irons seemed to pierce him, and with a bullet
through one leg, and a shattered arm he went down, and leaving him
there, the storm of battle swept on!

Conscious still, and believing his end had come, he yet remembered that
wall, and faint and bleeding he crawled back to it. He could hear the
roar of guns, and the groans of dying men about him, and in that awful
moment, with death near, one thought alone came, and that was to
shelter himself between the rocks, so that mad horses and frenzied men
might not trample upon his face. He could see near by a rock close to
the wall, and like some wild animal that had received its death wound,
yet crawls into a thicket to die, so he crept into this shelter and lay
there moaning.

Hour after hour passed in agony, while his life blood ebbed away. He
could not stop it; he did not try. Since death was near and he felt that
it must come, the sooner it was over the better. Men and horses swept by
and heeded him not! The fierce sun beat upon him, but no one came to
succor! His tongue grew parched and a terrible thirst tortured him; but
there was no water. Only the hard stones upon which his head was
pillowed, the dry earth that drank his blood, and the merciless sun
blazing above. He could hear the dying men about him groaning and
cursing God in their agony, and the roar of cannon that made the earth
tremble beneath him.

Then the sounds of conflict and carnage passed away, and left only the
moans of the wounded near him to echo his own. At last night came and
threw her dark mantle over that scene of death and despair, and later
the moon rose and shed her pale light upon it. Those soft beams of
silvery white were angels of mercy, for they carried that dying boy's
heart away to the hills of old New England, and to where a rippling
brook danced like silver coin beneath them, and a fair girl's face and
tender blue eyes smiled upon him. Then the picture faded and he knew no
more.




CHAPTER XVII.

THOSE WHO WAIT.


There is nothing in life much harder to bear than suspense. To know the
worst, whatever that may be, is far preferable to the long agony of
doubt; hoping for the best, yet fearing the worst. Even a hardened
criminal has been known to admit that the two or three hours of waiting
for the verdict was far worse than the march to the gallows. If this be
so, what must it be to the tender, loving hearts of good and true women
whose husbands, sweethearts, brothers and sons are facing the dangers of
war, and who (God pity them) have to endure this dread suspense for
weeks and months when no tidings reach them?

When the train bearing Liddy's soldier boy from sight had rolled away
she clung to her father's arm in mute despair. Pride sustained her until
they had left the town behind, and were driving across the wide plains
toward her home, and then the tears came. The memory of many pleasant
moonlit drives along the same road when her lover was with her came
back, and with it the realization that it was all ended, perhaps
forever, and that the best she could look forward to was three years of
weary waiting. Before her, miles away, rose the Blue Hills, distinct in
the clear air, and as she looked at them, back came the memory of one
day a month before--a day replete with joy and sorrow, when he had paid
her the greatest and sweetest compliment a man can pay a woman. She
could recall the very tones of his voice and she could almost feel the
touch of his arms when he had held her close for one brief moment. In
silence she rode along for a time, trying to control herself, and then
turning to her father she said:

"Father, there is something I must tell you, and I ask your forgiveness
for not doing so before." And then, in her odd, winsome way, resting her
cheek against his shoulder and holding her left hand before his face for
a moment, she continued: "Can you guess?"

"No, my child," he answered, quickly, wishing to cheer her, "I could not
possibly guess. The ways of my little girl are so deep and dark, how
could I?" and then continuing in a more cheerful tone: "Don't cry any
more, Liddy. Some one is coming back from the war by and by, and some
one else will want a lot of new dresses for a wedding, and expects to be
happy, and I hope she will be."

Then a little hand began stroking his arm and a still damp face was
being rubbed against his shoulder, and presently a soft voice whispered:
"Father, you have always been too good to me. You never said a word and
you knew it all along, I guess!" which rather incoherent speech may be
excused under the circumstances.

The few weeks that followed were not as gloomy to Liddy as later ones.
Her home duties outside of school hours had always been numerous, and
now she found them a relief. Letters also came frequently from the
absent one, and she felt that he was not yet in danger--that was a grain
of consolation. But when he wrote that they were to start for the front
the next day, her heart grew heavy again and from that time on the dread
suspense was never lifted. She wrote him frequently and tried to make
her letters brave and cheerful. All the simple details of her home life
were faithfully portrayed, and it became a habit to write him a page
every night. She called it a little chat, but it might better have been
called an evening prayer, for into those tender words were woven every
sweet wish and hopeful petition of a loving woman's heart. After the
battle of Chancellorsville a cloud seemed resting upon Southton, and
Liddy felt that the weary waiting was becoming more oppressive than
ever. It had been her father's custom to drive "over town," as it was
called, once a day to obtain the news, and she had always met him on his
return, even before he entered the house, to more quickly learn the
worst. She began to dread even this, lest he should bring the tidings
she feared most.

Then came the call for needed supplies to be used in the care of the
wounded, and gladly Liddy joined with other good ladies in picking lint,
preparing bandages, and the like, and contributing many articles for the
use and comfort of the soldiers. In this noble work she came to realize
how many other hearts besides her own carried a burden, and to feel a
kinship of sorrow with them. Her engagement to Manson seemed to be
generally known and the common burden soon obliterated her first girlish
reticence concerning it.

"I feel that I am growing old very fast," she wrote him, "and that I am
a girl no longer. Just think, it is only ten months since I felt angry
when some of the girls told me they heard I was engaged to you, and now
I don't care who knows it."

For the next three months there were no battles that he was engaged in,
and yet the suspense was the same. Then when the new year came another
burden was added, for her mother grew worse, and it seemed to Liddy as
if the shadows were thick about her. An event that occurred in the early
spring, and two months after the battle of Tracy City, made a deep
impression on her. Captain Upson, promoted from first lieutenant of
Company E, was wounded at that battle, and dying later, was brought to
Southton for burial. He was universally respected and almost the entire
townsfolk gathered at the church to pay their tribute. Hundreds failed
to gain admission, and it was said to have been the largest funeral ever
known in the town. Liddy had never seen a military funeral and the
ceremonies were sadly impressive. The long service at the church; the
touching words of the minister uttered over the flag-draped coffin, upon
which rested a sword; the sad procession to the cemetery, headed by
muffled drum and melancholy fife mingling their sounds with the tolling
bell, and then the arched arms of soldiers, beneath which the body was
borne; the short prayer; the three volleys; and last of all, lively
music on the return. This feature impressed her as the saddest of all,
for it seemed to say: "Now, we will forget the dead as soon as
possible," which in truth was what it meant in military custom.

It is needless to say as she returned with her father to their now
saddened home, a possible event of similar import in which she must be a
broken-hearted mourner entered her mind. During the next month came
another and far worse blow. Her mother, long an invalid, contracted a
severe cold and, in spite of all possible effort to save her, in three
short days passed away. To even faintly express the anguish of that now
bereaved husband and motherless girl is impossible and shall not be
attempted.

When the funeral was over and they once more sat by the fire in the
sitting-room, as was customary each evening, their pleasant home seemed
utterly desolate, and the tall clock in the hall ticked with far deeper
solemnity. Liddy in fact was, as she felt herself to be, walking
"through the valley and shadow of death." To add to her utter
wretchedness, if that were possible, she had received no letter from
Manson for three weeks, and there were no rifts of sunshine in her
horizon. She wrote him a long account of her loss and all the misery of
mind she was experiencing and then, as she had no address to mail it to,
held the letter in waiting, and finally tore it up. "It will only give
him pain to know it," she thought, "and he has enough to bear." When she
next heard from him she realized more than ever how many lonely and
homesick hours he had to endure, and was glad she had kept her sorrow to
herself.

A few weeks later her father, thinking to make the house more cheerful,
proposed that her Aunt Mary--a widowed sister of his--should come and
live with them.

"No, father," said Liddy, after the matter had been discussed, "I would
rather be alone and take care of you myself." Then she added, with a
little quiver in her voice: "You are the only one I've got to love now
and perhaps the only one I shall ever have."

Liddy was essentially a home-loving girl and cared but little for
company. A few friends, and good ones, might be considered as the text
of her life, and even at school it had been the same. Her home duties
and her father's needs were a sufficient kingdom, and over it she was a
gracious queen. For the first three months after her mother's death she
and her father lived a life of nearly silent sadness. Almost daily he
visited the town, dreading far worse than Liddy ever knew lest he must
return with sad tidings. He knew what was ever in her heart, and as her
life-happiness was dear to him, he wasted no time in discussing war news
with his friends in the village. When June came Liddy felt that a change
in the morose current of their lives must be made, and in her peculiar
way set about to carry out her idea. She knew his fiftieth birthday came
during that month, and when the day arrived she said to him:

"Come home early to-night, father, I have a great, big favor to ask of
you." All that afternoon she worked at her little plot, and when tea
time came and he entered the house a surprise awaited him. The
dining-table had been moved into the sitting-room, set with the best
china, and in the center was a vase of flowers. Draped from the hanging
lamp above it, and extending to each corner were ropes of ground pine,
and around his plate was a double row of full-blown roses. It was a
pretty sight, and when he looked at it he smiled and said: "Expecting
company, Liddy?"

"Yes, you," was her answer; "and I've made a shortcake, and I picked
the strawberries myself."

When he was seated in his accustomed chair he looked at the array of
roses, and in a surprised voice remarked: "Why didn't you put some
around your own plate, Liddy?"

"Because it's not my birthday," came the answer; "count them, father."

The thoughtful tribute touched him, and a look of sadness crept in his
face. "I had forgotten how old I was," he said.

Liddy made no reply until she had poured his tea, and then she said, in
her earnest way: "Now, father, I don't want you to think of that any
more, or anything else that is past and gone. Please think how hard I
worked all the afternoon to fix the table and how much I want to make
you happy."

When it came time to retire, he said: "You haven't told me yet what that
big favor is, Liddy!"

For answer she went to him and taking his face in her hands, she kissed
him on either cheek and whispered: "Wait till to-morrow!"




CHAPTER XVIII.

A FEW BRIGHT DAYS.


The next evening after supper Liddy showed unusual cheerfulness. She had
that day received three letters from the absent one, though of different
dates, and all contained assuring words. Then she had a little plan of
loving intent mapped out in her mind and was eager to carry it out. Her
father noticed her unusual mood and said: "It seems good to see you
smile once more, Liddy."

"I am trying hard to feel happy," she answered, "and harder still to
make you feel so as well." And then, drawing her chair close to him, she
sat down and rested her face against his shoulder. It was one of her odd
ways, and it must be now stated that when this winsome girl most
earnestly desired to reach her father's heart, she always stroked his
shoulder with her face.

"Well," he said, recognizing her method, "I know you have something on
your mind; so tell me what it is right away!"

She made no immediate reply, but softly stroked him for a moment and
then replied: "Yes, I do want something; I want a clock!" and then,
straightening herself up, she continued earnestly: "I want a lot of
things; I want a pretty clock to put on the mantel, and I want you to
put the tall one up into the attic, for it gives me the blues; and say,
father"---- and here again her face went to his shoulder, "I want a
piano!"

"Is that all?" he answered, a droll smile creeping into his face.

"No," she said, "that isn't all; but it's all I dare ask for now."

"Better tell me the rest," he replied, stroking the head that still
rested against his arm. "You haven't surprised me yet."

And then there was a very pretty scene, for the next instant that
blue-eyed heart-breaker was sitting in her father's lap, with both arms
around his neck.

"Do you mean it, father?" she whispered. "Can I have a piano?"

"Why, of course," he answered softly, "if you want one."

In a week the old cottage organ that had felt the touch of Liddy's
childish fingers learning the scale, was keeping company with the tall
clock in the attic, and in its place stood a piano. In the sitting-room
a new clock that chimed the hours and halves ticked on the mantel. These
were not all the changes, for when so much was won our heart-breaker
renewed her assault by her usual method, and pretty portières took the
place of doors between parlor, hall and sitting-room, and delicate lace
curtains draped the windows. Then Liddy surveyed her home with
satisfaction and asked her father how he liked it.

"It makes a great change in the rooms," he replied, "and they seem more
cheerful."

"Do you notice that it also makes the carpets look worn and shabby?"
said Liddy; "and the parlor furniture a little old-fashioned?"

Mr. Camp sat down in one of the parlor chairs and looked around. For a
few moments he surveyed the room in silence and then said: "Liddy, did
you ever hear the story of the brass fire-dogs? I don't think you have,
so I will tell it. There was once a good woman who persuaded her husband
to buy a pair of brass fire-dogs for the parlor, to take the place of
the old iron ones. When the new ones were in place she polished them
very brightly and asked him to look into the room. 'Don't you think,'
she said, 'they make the carpet look old and worn?' They certainly did,
so he bought a new carpet. That in turn made the furniture seem shabby,
so he was persuaded to renew that. By this time the curtains were not in
harmony, and had to be changed. When it was all done he remarked: 'Wife,
you said the fire-dogs would only cost me four dollars, but they have
really cost me two hundred.'"

"But we had the brass fire-dogs already," said Liddy laughing, "so the
story doesn't hit me." Then, going to him and putting one arm around his
neck and stroking his face with the other hand, she continued: "The
trouble is, father, you have got me instead of new fire-dogs; are you
sorry?"

"You must judge for yourself," was his answer. "Is there anything else
you wish?"

"Yes, there are two other things I want," was her reply, still stroking
him; "I want to see you look happier, and feel happier, and I want some
one to come back safe from the war."

Life is at best but a succession of moods that, like a pendulum, ever
vibrate between mirth and sadness. Circumstances will almost invariably
force the vibrations to greater extremes, but just as surely will its
opposite mood return. Though clouds darken to-day, the sun will shine
to-morrow; and if sorrow comes, joy will follow; while ever above the
rippled shores of laughter floats the mist of tears.

In some respects Liddy was a peculiar girl. While loving those near her
with almost pathetic tenderness and constantly striving to show it, she
shrank like a scared child from any public exhibition of that feeling.
She had another peculiarity that might be called a whim--she loved to
try experiments upon her own feelings to see what effect they would
have. It was this that had been the real cause of her desire to attend
the military funeral that had taken place in Southton a few months
previous. Since her mother's death Liddy had remained at home nearly all
the time. She seldom went to the village, because to do so awakened
unpleasant memories. To drive past the now vacant academy or near the
depot was to awaken unhappy thought and force her into a sad mood. The
seclusion of her home seemed more in harmony with her feelings. She had
but few intimate friends, and even those jarred upon her now, and her
father was the best, and the only one she cared to be with. One day in
mid-summer, she surprised him with a strange request.

"Father," she said, "I want to go fishing. I don't mean to tramp
through the brush along a brook, but I want you to take me to some
pretty pond where there are trees all around, and where I can sit in a
boat on the shady side and fish. We will take a basket of lunch and have
a nice time. If we cannot catch fish we can pick pond lilies. Will you
go?"

As there was nothing that loving father would not do for his only child,
it is needless to say that the trip was made.

When Liddy began to catch fish, and he noticed how excited she became,
he said, with quiet humor: "Which would you rather do, Liddy, put your
fish in the boat or hang them up in the trees? Tut, tut!" he continued,
as he saw a deep shadow creep over her face, "you will have Charlie to
bait your hook next summer, never fear!"

That night she wrote to her soldier boy: "I coaxed father to take me
fishing to-day. I wanted to see if it wouldn't bring me nearer to you or
you to me. I came home in a sad mood, however, though I learned one
thing, and that is wherein lies the fascination of fishing. It's the
constant expectation of getting a bite that takes your mind away from
all else."

With the autumn evenings came the time for open fires, and Liddy had
hard work to keep her spirits up. There were so many tender
associations lurking in the firelight, and so much that brought back the
past and gone hours of happiness that it was painful instead of
cheerful. Thanksgiving time and the holidays were days of sadness
instead of joy. The long eighteen months of constant dread and suspense
had worn upon her nerves and was slowly changing her from a
light-hearted, happy girl to a saddened, waiting woman. The winter
slowly dragged its weary length, and one evening, about a year from the
time she had attended the military funeral, she broke down entirely. She
had tried piano practice for a time and then reading, but neither
availed to occupy her thoughts or drive away the gloom. Finally she sat
down beside her father, who was reading, and said piteously:

"Father, please talk to me; tell me stories, scold me--anything! I am so
utterly wretched I am ready to cry!"

"My child," he answered tenderly, stroking the fair head that was
resting against his arm, "don't let your mind brood so much upon your
own troubles; try and think how many there are who have more to bear
than you have."

The delicate reproach, though not intended as such by him, was the last
straw, for the next instant her head was down in his lap and she was
sobbing like a child. When the little shower was over she raised her
face and whispered:

"Don't think it's all Charlie, father, or that I forget mother, or how
much you have to bear; for I do not. It's all combined, and the silent
room upstairs added to the dread, that is breaking my heart."

When the day that marked the anniversary of her parting from Manson
arrived she tried another experiment upon herself. The promise she had
made him that day seemed a sacred bond, and she resolved to go alone to
Blue Hill and see how it would affect her. The day was almost identical
to the one two years previous, and when, late in the afternoon, she
arrived at the top, the spot seemed unchanged. The trees were thick with
the same fresh foliage, the birds were there, and around the rock where
they had sat grew the same blue violets. Under a tree was the little
lattice table, just as they had left it. She sat down on the rock and
tried to live over the thoughts and feelings of that day. They all came
back, like so many spectres of a past and gone happiness, and as, one by
one, they filed by in thought, the utter silence and solitude of the
place seemed to increase. The only sound was the faint whisper of the
breeze in the hemlocks, and as she listened and looked into the shadow
beyond where the trees grew thicker, a strange feeling of fear began to
assail her heart and a new and horrible dread crept into her thoughts.
She had not heard from the absent one for two weeks--what if the dreaded
fate had already come and he was at this very moment near her in spirit?
And as all the horror of this thought forced itself upon her, she
suddenly rose to her feet, and almost running, left the spot.

When she arrived home and looked into her mirror she saw a strange
expression on her face and her lips were pale. "I could not go there
again," she said to herself; "I should go mad if I did."

During the next few weeks the dread seemed to grow upon her day by day.
She did not dare tell her father of her trip to Blue Hill, but he
noticed that she was getting thin and that her eyes were growing hollow.
Then came the news of the battle of Peach Creek and that Company E were
engaged in it; but no names of the killed or wounded, if any, reached
her, and no letter from Manson.

Each day her father drove to the village and he was always met at the
gate upon his return by a sad-faced girl whose blue eyes wore a look of
piteous appeal. He tried to comfort her all he could; but it did no
good. She could not talk; she could scarcely eat or sleep, but went
about her daily work as if in a trance. Occasionally in the evening she
would give way to tears, and for three weeks she existed in a state of
wretchedness no pen can describe. Then one evening her father handed her
a letter in a strange handwriting and turned his face away, for he knew
its contents.

"Tell me the worst, father," she almost screamed, "tell me quick; is he
alive?"

"Yes, my child," he answered sadly, "but we must go to him to-morrow. He
is in the hospital at Washington and very low."




CHAPTER XIX.

AMONG THE WOUNDED.


At nearly noon the day after the battle of Peach Creek the searchers for
wounded came upon Manson, still alive, but delirious. Of that ghastly
battlefield, or the long agony of that wounded boy, I hesitate to speak.
No pen can describe, either, and to even faintly portray them is but to
add gloom to a narrative already replete with it. The twenty-four hours
of his indescribable pain and torturing thirst were only broken by a few
hours of merciful delirium, when he was once more a boy and living his
simple, care-free life on the farm, or happy with Liddy. When found he
knew it not. When examined by a surgeon that stern man shook his head
and remarked: "Slim chance for you, poor devil--too much blood gone
already!"

For two weeks he was delirious most of the time, but his rugged
constitution saved him, and when he showed signs of gaining and could
be moved, he was taken to the hospital at Washington. Once there, he
began to fail again, for the long journey had been too much for him.

"He won't last long," said the doctor in charge to the nurse. "Better
ask him if there is any one he wishes to see."

When he made his rounds the next morning Manson was worse and again out
of his head. "He has been wandering in his mind all night," was the
nurse's report, "and he talks about fishing and catching things in
traps, and there is a girl mixed in it all. Case of sweetheart, I
guess."

That day the wounded boy rallied a little and began to think, and bit by
bit the sane hours of the past few weeks came back to him. How near to
the shores of eternal silence his bark had drifted, he little knew! The
long hours of agony on the battlefield since the moment he had
instinctively crawled behind a rock had been a delirium of despair
broken only by visions of vague and shadowy import that he could not
grasp. All that he thought was that death must soon end his misery, and
he hoped it might come soon. At times he had bitten and torn the sleeves
of his coat, soaked with blood from his shattered arm, or beaten his
head against the dry earth in his agony.

How long it had lasted he could not tell, and the last that he
remembered was looking at the moon, and then he seemed to be drifting
away and all pain ceased. Then all around him he could hear voices and
over his head a roof, and he felt as if awakened from some horrible
dream. With his well arm he felt of the other and found it was bound
with splints. The faces he could see were all strange, but the men wore
the familiar blue uniform and he knew they were not enemies. He was
carried to a freight-car and laid in it, where he took a long, jolting
ride that was all a torture, at the end of which he was taken in an open
wagon to a long, low building, and laid on one of many narrow cots which
were ranged in double rows. He could not raise his head or turn his
body. He could only rest utterly helpless and inert, and indifferent to
either life or death.

Of Liddy he thought many times, and of his mother and father as well,
and he wondered what they would say and how they would feel when the
tidings reached them. Then a kind-faced woman came and lifted his head
and held it while he took medicine or sipped broth, and then he was
wandering beside a brook again, or in green meadows. Later he could see
the white cots all about and the unceiled roof over his head and the
same motherly face, and he was asked who his friends were and whom he
would like to send for, and from that time on he began to hope.

Would the one human being on earth he cared most to see come so far, and
could she if she would? And would life still be left in him when she
reached his side; or would he have been carried out of the long, low
room, dead, as he had seen others carried? He wondered what she would
say or do when she came, and oh! if he could only know whether she was
coming! He could see the door at one corner of the room where she must
enter, and it was a little comfort to look at that. Then a resolution
and a feeling that he must live and be there when she came began to grow
upon him. He knew four days had passed since she had been sent for and
he could now count the hours, and from that time on his eyes were seldom
turned away from that door while he was awake. Did ever hours pass more
slowly than those? Could it be possible? I think not. He had no means of
knowing the time except to ask the nurse, and when night came he knew
that sleep might bridge a few hours more speedily.

Six days passed, and then in the gray light of the next morning he
opened his weary waiting eyes and saw bending over him the fair face
that for two long years, and all through his hopeless agony he had
longed for, and as he reached his hand to her in mute gratitude, unable
to speak, he felt it clasped, and the next instant she was on her knees
beside him and pressing a tear-wet face upon it, and he was listening to
the first prayer she ever uttered!

Gone now like a flash of light were all those weary months of
heart-hunger! Gone all the agony and despair of that day and night on
the battlefield! Gone all the hours of pain through which he counted the
moments one by one as he watched the door! No more was he lying upon a
narrow cot listening to the moans of the wounded as he saw the dead
carried out! Instead was he resting on a bed of violets and listening to
the heart throbs of thankfulness and supplication murmured by an angel!
And if ever a prayer reached the heavenly throne it was that one! When
it was finished, and her loving blue eyes were looking into his, he
whispered:

"Liddy, God bless you! Now I shall live."

Such is the power of love!

I feel that here and now I must beg the kind reader's pardon for
introducing so much that is painful and sad in the lives of these two,
fitted by birth and education for peace and simple home happiness. War
and all its horrors is not akin to them and was never meant to be.
Rather should their footsteps lead them where the bobolink sings as he
circles over a green meadow, and the blue water lilies stoop to kiss the
brook that ripples through it; or where the fields of grain bend and
billow in the summer breeze; or the old mill-wheel splashes, while the
white flowers in the pond above smile in the sunlight. If the patient
reader will but follow their lives a little further, only peace and
happiness and all the gentle voices of nature shall be their companions.

For a month, while cheered by the presence of her devoted father, Liddy
nursed that feeble spark of life back to health and strength as only a
tender and heroic woman could. All the dread aftermath of war that daily
assailed her every sense, did not make her falter, but through all those
scenes of misery and death she bravely stood by her post and her
love-imposed duty. How hard a task it was, no one unaccustomed to such
surroundings can even faintly realize, and it need not be dwelt upon.
When she had fulfilled the most God-like mission ever confided to
woman's hands--that of caring for the sick and dying--and when returning
strength made it possible to remove her charge, those three devoted ones
returned to the hills of old New England.

How fair the peaceful valley of Southton seemed once more, and how clear
and distinct the Blue Hills were outlined in the pure September air! The
trees were just gaining the annual glory of autumn color; but to Liddy
they brought no tinge of melancholy, for her heart was full of sweetest
joy. She had saved the one life dearest on earth to her, and now the
voices of nature were but sounds of heavenly music. And how dear to her
was her home once more, and all about it! The brook that rippled near
sounded like the low tinkle of sweet bells, and the maple by the gate
whispered once again the tender thoughts of the love that had first come
to her beneath them. She was like a child in her happiness, and every
thought and every impulse was touched by the mystic, magic wand of love.
Few ever know the supreme joy that came to her and none can except they
walk with bleeding hearts and weary feet through the valley of despair,
bearing the burden of a loved one's life.

The first evening she was alone with her father, she came as a child
would, to sit upon his knee, and putting her arms around his neck
whispered:

"Father, I never knew until now what it means to be happy, and how good
and kind you could be to me, and how little it is in my power to pay it
all back. I can only love and care for you as long as I live, or as long
as God spares your life."

And be it said, she kept her promise.




CHAPTER XX.

PLANS FOR HAPPINESS.


Appomattox and a glorious ending of the most sanguinary war in the
history of the nineteenth century had come, and with it a few changes in
Southton.

Only a part of that brave E Company that three years before marched so
proudly away to fight for the Union ever returned, and of those the
greater number bore the scars of war and disease. Very many sorrowing
women and children were scattered through the town, whose hearts were
sore with wounds that only time could heal, and the empty sleeve and the
vacant chair were sad reminders on all sides.

The Rev. Jotham still extended his time-worn orthodox arguments to a
wearisome length, usually concluding them with more or less varied and
vivid pictures of the doom in store for those who failed at once to
repent and believe; but strange to say the sinners who were moved by his
eloquence were few and far between. It was known that he was not in
sympathy with the great majority of the North, or the principles upon
which the war had been fought, but believed in the right of secession,
and that the North was wrong in its political position. Had he kept
these opinions to himself it would have been far wiser; but he made the
mistake of giving utterance to them at a Memorial Day service held in
his church, which expression was so obnoxious to the most of his
audience and such a direct reflection upon the brave men from the town
who had shed their blood for their country that one of the leading men
of Southton arose at the close of Rev. Jotham's remarks and there and
then rebuked him. The affair created quite a disturbance in public
feeling and was perhaps one of the indirect causes that eventually led
to a division of his church and to the formation of a separate society
in another part of the town.

A new principal had assumed charge of the academy, the trustees having
decided for several reasons that a change would be beneficial. Mr.
Webber, who had ruled there for several years, industriously circulated
a report that by reason of several very flattering offers to engage in
mercantile pursuits, as well as failing health, he had decided to
resign. As his voice, and the apparent desire to use it upon any and all
possible occasions, showed no cessation of energy, a few skeptical ones
were inclined to doubt that his health was seriously affected, and as it
was over a year before he accepted any of the flattering offers, they
believed he must have had hard work to find them. For the rest the town
resumed the old-time even tenor of its way, though there had been added
to its annals heroic history, and to its calendar one day of annual
mourning.

Aunt Sally Hart said that "Liddy Camp had showed mighty good grit and
that young Manson ought to feel purty proud of her," which expression
seemed to reflect the general sentiment.

When the autumn days and returning health came to Manson, sunshine
seemed to once more smile upon the lives of our two young friends, and
how happy they were during the all too short evenings spent together in
Liddy's newly furnished parlor, need not be described. It was no longer
a courtship, but rather a loving discussion of future plans in life, for
each felt bound by an obligation stronger even than love, and how many
charming air castles they built out of the firelight flashes shall not
be told. In a way, Liddy was a heroine among the little circle of her
schoolmates and friends, and deserved to be, for few there were among
them who could have found the strength to have faced the ghastly scenes
she had, from a sense of duty.

"I do not care to talk about it," she said once to one of those who had
been near her in the old days at the academy; "it all came so suddenly I
did not stop to think, and if I had it would have made no difference. I
did not think of myself at all, or what I was to meet. How horrible it
was to be thrust among hundreds of wounded and dying men; to hear what I
had to, and see what I did, I cannot describe and do not wish to. Under
the same circumstances," she added quietly, "I should face that awful
experience over again if necessary."

Life and all its plans practically resolve themselves into a question of
income finally, and no matter how well aimed Cupid's darts may be, the
almighty dollar and the ability to obtain possession of it, is of
greater weight in the scale than all the arrows the boy-god ever
carried. Even as an academy boy Manson had realized this; faintly at
first, and yet with growing force, as his attachment for Liddy
increased. With a certain pride in character he had resolved to withhold
any declaration of love until he had at least a settled occupation in
life; but when it came to going to war and parting, perhaps forever,
from the girl he loved, to longer remain silent was to control himself
beyond his strength. Now that she had shown how much his life meant to
her by an act of devotion and self-sacrifice so unusual, his ambition to
obtain a home that he could invite her to share, returned with redoubled
force. What to do, or where to turn, he did not know. He was not even
recuperated from the terrible ordeal that had so nearly cost him his
life; but for all that his ambition was spurring him onward far in
advance of his strength. One evening late that autumn, when he found
himself unexpectedly alone with Mr. Camp, he said:

"I have for some time wished to express to you my hopes and ask your
advice regarding my future plans. First, I want to ask you for Liddy,
and beyond that, what I had best turn to to obtain a livelihood. I want
Liddy, and I want a home to keep her in."

Mr. Camp looked at him a moment, while a droll smile crept into his
face, and then replied:

"I am willing you should have Liddy, of course. I wouldn't have taken
her to that hospital to try to save your life if I hadn't believed you
worthy of her; but beyond that I don't think I have much to say in the
matter anyway. I couldn't keep you apart if I would, and I wouldn't if
I could." And then he added a little more seriously: "She is all I have
left in my life, and whatever plans you two make, I hope you will
consider that."

Manson was silent. The perfect confidence and simple pathos of Mr.
Camp's statement came to him forcibly, and made him realize how much he
was asking. He meditated a few moments, and then said:

"I feel that I am asking for more than I deserve, and that I owe you far
more than I can ever repay, but believe me, I shall do all in my power."

"We won't worry about that now," replied Mr. Camp, smiling again; "wait
till your arm is well, and then we will talk it all over. In the
meantime"--and a twinkle came into his eyes--"you have one well arm, and
I guess that's all Liddy needs just at present."

The autumn and winter evenings sped by on wings of wind to Liddy and her
lover, for all the sweet illusions of life were theirs. Occasionally
they called on some of their old schoolmates, or were invited to social
gatherings, and how proud she was of her manly escort, and he of the
fair girl he felt was all his own, need not be told.

One day in the spring Mr. Camp said to Manson: "How would you like to be
a farmer?"

"I have no objections," he replied; "my father is one, and there is no
reason why I should be ashamed of it. It means hard work, but I am used
to that. I am ready and willing to do anything to earn an honest
living."

Mr. Camp looked at him for a moment reflectively, and then said:

"That has the right ring in it, my boy," and after thinking a little
longer added: "I'll tell you what I'll do. Charles, if you can get Liddy
to set the day I will give her a deed of the house and you a deed of the
farm, provided you two will take care of me. That's fair, isn't it?"
Then he added, with a smile, "I guess you can coax her consent if you
try hard."

The proposition was so unexpected and surprising that for a moment
Manson could not speak, and then, when it all came to him, and he saw
the door of his dream of happiness opened wide by such an offer, the
tears almost started. For one instant he was in danger of yielding, but
he recovered himself.

"No mere words can possibly express my gratitude, sir," he replied, "but
I could not accept so much. All I ask for, and all I will accept is
Liddy, and that is enough. To let you give me your farm would make me
feel that I was robbing you. I could not do it, sir."

And then, as he saw a look of pain come into his would-be benefactor's
face, he continued: "Now, I will tell you what I am willing, and should
be more than glad to do. Let Liddy and me keep house for you, and I will
manage the farm, under your direction. That is enough, and all I can
accept."

"I respect your feeling of independence," replied Mr. Camp, a little
sadly, "but it won't work. A young man, to be content, must feel that he
has a home that is, or soon will be, all his own. I do not want to put a
burden on your feelings, but I want to make both you and my child happy,
and"--with a little tremor in his voice--"I've only got Liddy to care
for me in my old age, and it's hard to give her up. Can't you believe
what I offer is wisest and best? Would it make you feel any better to
give me a note and pay it when you chose? I would never ask you for it."

That evening when the lovers sat under the freshly leaved maples, he
told her what her father had offered.

"I've known it for some time," she said, "and I feared you would feel
hurt and refuse it, and hurt father, and I hope you did not. Put
yourself in father's place," she continued seriously, "and tell me how
you would feel. Remember that I am all he has to love and care for him,
and he is very dear to me. He would not hurt you for the world, and what
he thinks is the best way I believe _is_ the best."

"I will think it over," was Manson's comment. "It's so sudden and
overwhelming I do not know what to say or do. I can't see a way out of
it, either," he went on reflectively. "I want you and I want a home to
keep you in, all our own, but how, or where it's coming from, I can't
see. Then it's too much to ask him to give you up."

He paused, and leaning over and resting his face on his hands, continued
rather sadly:

"I guess it would have been just as well if you had left me to die in
the hospital."

It was a cruel remark and he saw it in an instant, for he said quickly:
"Forgive me, I didn't mean that. I've got you and two hands to work
with, and that's hope enough. Give me time and I'll solve the problem,
never fear!"

When they parted she put one arm around his neck and whispered:

"It's the old vocation enigma over again, Charlie, isn't it? But don't
let it make you miserable, and don't ever say such a thing as that you
just said again. Do you know, when I came to you in the hospital that
morning, I had not slept one moment for two long days and nights! Now
try and be happy to pay me for it, and remember:

    "'The happiest life that ever was led
     Is always to court and never to wed.'"

Then she kissed him, in her tender way, and if he did not think she was
right, it was because he was like most young men who don't know when
they are well off and happy.




CHAPTER XXI.

BLUE HILL.


Three years from the day Manson led Liddy to the carriage, blinded by
tears and heart broken at the separation in store, they once more
visited that dearly loved spot. It was a place more sacred to them than
a church, for it had been hallowed by the tears of love and sanctified
by the noblest impulses of two honest and true hearts. It was far
removed from all the vain pomp and display of humanity and the sordid
and selfish influences of life. To Liddy and her lover it was a spot
that appealed to all that was holiest and best in their natures, and
lifted them above selfish thought.

"Can you realize how I felt," Manson said on the way, "the day I rode in
silence up here and then told you I had enlisted?"

"No," she answered; "no more than you can imagine how I felt. I think I
suffered the more, for I was in suspense and you were not. That makes
me think of a question I have long wanted to ask you. You won't mind
now, will you?" she continued with a smile and a twinkle in her eyes.
"Why did you tell the bad news first and propose afterward? Why didn't
you pop the question first?"

"I thought you would be more apt to say 'yes' if I put it the way I
did."

"I think you knew it wouldn't be 'no,'" she said. "I knew that was
coming weeks before."

"You did," he replied, a little surprised. "How did you know?"

"Do you think I was blind?" she answered archly. "A girl usually knows
when that question is liable to come for months beforehand, and if it is
to be 'no' the man in the case will have hard work to obtain a good
opportunity."

When they were seated beside the rock once more she said: "Now, sir,
three years ago I told you we must feel and act like children one day up
here, and you minded me very well; but it was hard work, I think. It was
for me, I am sure."

"It will be easier to-day," he responded, "for I've only one thing to
worry about, and that is the proposition your father made."

She looked at him a moment, and in her eyes he saw a little of the same
humorous twinkle he had at one time noticed in her father's eyes, and
then she said:

"Suppose I should say I would not marry you until you had a home of your
own to take me to; how would that seem?"

"I would not blame you," he answered soberly; "only you would have to
see clouds on my face a long time, I fear."

"Oh, I haven't said so yet," she continued as she saw one gathering
there then, "only I thought it might make you see father's proposition
in a new light. Poor father," she went on musingly, "he wants to make us
both happy, and he doesn't know how to bring it about."

"Why can't he accept my plan, then?" said Manson. "I am ready and
willing."

"But I haven't said I was," responded Liddy. "I am not sure that I want
people to think my husband is working for my father on the farm. Oh, I
didn't mean it that way," as she saw a frown coming, "only I have some
pride as well as you; that is all. Now, Charlie, please don't say
another word about it to-day. Remember, we are children!"

Then she told him about her lone visit to this spot a year before, and
how it affected her.

"Do you know," she explained, "I was terribly scared, and I imagined I
heard ghostly footsteps all around here, and when I reached home I was
as pale as a ghost myself."

"It was a foolish thing to do," he said, "and a silly promise for me to
exact."

"I should have kept it just the same," was her answer, "as long as I
lived."

At noon he rebuilt the little lattice table, and after the dainty dinner
was disposed of, they gathered flowers, picked wintergreen, wove wreaths
for each other's hats and talked silly nothings for hours, and enjoyed
it, too, as lovers will. Late in the afternoon, when tired of this, he
arranged the carriage robe and cushions beside the rock and asked her to
sit beside him. It was a preliminary to some serious utterance, she
felt, for he at once remarked:

"Liddy, I've something to tell you."

She looked at him for a moment, while a smile crept into her face, and
then said:

"Now, Charlie, if you have any more startling or painful things to tell
me, don't bring me up here first, or I shall always dread to come."

"Was my confession of love, made here, painful?" he remarked.

"Of course not," she answered, "nor startling, either, for, as I told
you, I knew that was coming. But the other part of it nearly broke my
heart. You must have thought me silly!"

How earnestly, and in what manner he assured her she did not act silly
on that occasion, but was the sweetest and dearest girl that ever lived,
need not be specified. When that little episode was over and she had
adjusted her hat, she said:

"Now tell me your story, Charlie."

"Well," he replied, "one night nearly two years ago I was on picket
duty, and I made the acquaintance of a young fellow by the name of Frank
Pullen, who belonged to a Maine regiment. We kept up an acquaintance for
two months and in that time became very good friends. We were in much
the same state of mind, for he, too, had a waiting sweetheart at home,
and when we separated we each promised to write to the other, if we
lived to do so. His father is a retired sea captain, and well-to-do, and
lives in a little out-of-the-way place in Maine. A month ago I received
a letter from Frank and an urgent invitation to visit him, and I've
promised to do so."

"That's nice," said Liddy regretfully, "to be told I am to be left alone
all summer! The next time you ask me up here I shall say: 'Tell me the
bad news first!'"

"Liddy," he replied seriously, "it's not for a pleasure trip that I am
going. He knows how I am situated and a good deal about my hopes and
plans, and he has promised to help me."

She was silent, for this opened a new field of conjecture and for a long
time she mused upon it, and at last said:

"I do not see how his assistance will help matters much, do you?"

"No, to be candid," he replied, "I do not yet; still it may. I am almost
sorry I promised to go, but my friend will feel hurt now if I don't. I
may obtain a few suggestions that will help me to solve this problem."

She made no reply, for the situation seemed as complex to her as to her
suitor. She respected the pride that had made him refuse her father's
generous offer, and at the same time she felt herself tortured by
conflicting emotions. To desert her father she could not, and to deny
her lover his right to herself as a wife was almost as impossible. A
long wait seemed the only solution, unless he would accept her father's
offer.

Perhaps the same conclusions were reached by Manson, for he said at
last: "Do not blame me for going away or looking about to find some way
out of this dilemma. I shall never find one here in Southton. The world
is wide, and I do not feel it half so hard to face as rebel bullets.
There is room for me in it, and a chance to win a home for you and me,
and I am going to fight for that chance. I am too proud to accept your
father's farm as a gift, and you are too proud to have me work for him,
even if he gave me all the farm produced. Then you can't leave him, and
I won't ask you to do so. The only way is to wait and work, and work
hard for the girl I love, and her father will be as welcome in that home
as she."

He paused, and a look of admiration for his spirited words came into her
face.

"Charlie," she said in a low voice, "please don't think I am proud or
stubborn. I can't leave father, but I will wait for you as long as you
wish or I will marry you when you wish, provided, of course, you give me
time to get ready. Only do not feel that I will let pride separate us
for long. Whatever you are satisfied to do shall be my law."

Her loving assurance cheered him greatly, for he answered in a hopeful
voice:

"Wait patiently until I return, and then we will decide what is best to
do."

When it came time to leave their trysting-place he drew from an inside
pocket a small pocketbook, worn and stained, and handed it to Liddy. She
opened it and found a bunch of faded violets and a lock of golden hair.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE MAINE COAST.


There is no part of the New England shores so charming as the coast of
Maine. From Cape Elizabeth on the west to Quoddy Head on the east, there
are over a thousand large and small islands, nearly all of which are of
bold formation and most of them wholly or in part covered with a growth
of spruce and fir. The shores of these islands, as well as the mainland,
are mainly rock-ribbed, with many high cliffs, at the foot of which the
ocean surges beat unceasingly. Deep fissures and sea caverns into which
the green water, changed to yeasty foam, ever churns and rushes by day
and night, are common; and when storms arise it bellows and roars like
an angry bull. Here the clinging rock-weeds and broad kelpie float and
wave idly or are lashed in anger by the waves that seem always trying to
tear them loose from the rocks.

Locked in the embrace of these bold shores are countless coves, inlets
and harbors, many so land-locked that never a ripple disturbs their
surface, and here the fishhawk and seagull seek their food and build
their nests undisturbed by man. No sound except the unceasing murmur of
the winds in the fir trees, or the low-voiced neighboring ocean, breaks
the stillness. Along the rocky shore and over these green-clad cliffs
one may wander for days in absolute solitude, seeing or hearing naught
of humanity or the handiwork of man. Here may be found the wondrous
magic and mystery of the sea in all its moods--pathetic, peaceful or
grand, and its society, where none intrude. Here, too, wedged among the
wave-washed rocks, can be found many a tale of shipwreck, despair and
death, or whispers of luxuriant life in tropical lands, and all the
flotsam and jetsam of the ocean, cast ashore to bleach like bones in a
desert, year in and year out.

Safe harbors are numerous, though not easy of access, for sunken ledges
or merciless reefs guard them from approach. In places are deep bays,
notably Somes Sound, connected with the ocean by an inlet a few rods
wide. Only the accessible harbors have been utilized by man, and but
few of these are, even to-day. At the head of one of these, and forming
the only safe harbor of the Isle au Haut, there clustered a little
fishing hamlet forty years ago, the largest house of which was one
occupied by Captain Obed Pullen, a retired sea captain, his wife, two
sons--Frank and Obed, Jr., and one daughter.

The house was a white, square, two-story one with a flat roof built with
bulwarks around it, having portholes like those of a man-of-war. There
was a small yard in front surrounded by a board fence, and on a knoll
just back of the house was a small enclosure containing a few white
headstones. Captain Pullen, having amassed sufficient of this world's
goods, lived in peaceful seclusion, far removed from the worldly strife
he wished to avoid. With his two sons, he tilled a few acres of land. He
fished a little as a pastime, and visited the mainland but seldom. He
was a blunt-spoken, but warm-hearted man, with shaggy white beard and
hair, and a voice and handshake as hearty as a gale of wind.

To this abode of simple cordiality and good will, one summer day, and by
invitation of the old captain's son Frank, came our battle-scarred and
love-lorn friend Manson. He and young Pullen had much in common, for
both loved the sea, and their friendship, formed when both were
environed by the dangers of war, made them now the most affectionate of
friends. Manson found himself at once welcomed by the entire family as a
valued friend and one whom they all seemed proud to entertain.

"We don't put on style down here," said the old captain to him at the
first meal, and in a voice that made the dishes rattle, "but we're right
glad to see ye, and we'll give ye some fun if the wind holds out. Be ye
fond o' fishin'?"

As fishing was a mania with Manson, and as his opportunities had been
limited to the peaceful seclusion of brooks, or the calm waters of mill
ponds, it is needless to say that he admitted he was fond of that sport.

"Frank tells me," continued the captain with blunt directness, "that ye
have got a sweetheart ye left to come here visitin', but ye best quit
thinkin' 'bout her if ye go fishin'."

Whether our young friend did or not does not matter; but it is certain
that the days which followed, passed amid such surroundings, were red
letter ones in his history. With two young men of about his own age for
companions, a trim and staunch fishing sloop with cabin and cooking
conveniences ready at hand, and nothing to do but sail and fish, or
explore the wild shores and fir-clad islands all about, was like a new
world to him. One day it was a fishing trip and a chowder party composed
of the entire family; and the next a frolic in an island grove where the
young men dug clams on a bit of sandy shore and afterward steamed them
among the rocks. Such opportunities were new to him, and with kind
friends near, and a feeling that he was thoroughly welcome in their home
added to the marvel of enchantment; while all about, the ever-present
sea made him almost forget the vexing problem of his future.

"It's like a visit to a fairy land," he said one day to his friend
Frank, as they were slowly drifting past a low green island. It was
nearly sundown, and the breeze had almost died away, so that the sloop
barely moved through the unruffled waters and every tree and rock on the
near-by shore was reflected clear and distinct. "To me," he continued,
"it is an entrance into an old-time wonder world, and to sail for hours
among these islands or in sight of shores where not a house or even a
fish hut is visible, makes it seem as if we were explorers first
visiting a new land. When we pass the entrance to some deep cove I half
expect to see an Indian paddling a canoe up into it, or spy a deer
watching us out of a thicket. My ideas of the ocean have been obtained
where islands are few, and passing ships or houses along shore are
always visible. Here it is so solitary. We seldom see a vessel and not
more than two or three small craft in an all day's cruise."

"That's the best of it," explained Frank, "you have it all to yourself.
But it's different in winter. You have too much of it to yourself then.
Altogether too much, for we are prisoners on the island for weeks at a
time, and that graveyard up back of the house makes it seem worse. I
wish you could come down here next fall and stay all winter. We don't do
a thing but eat and sleep or go ashore once a month for papers,
and"--laughing--"just think of what a good chance you would have to get
acquainted with your wife!"

Manson was silent. The suggestion opened a vein of vexatious thought in
connection with his dilemma that was not pleasant.

"Just think it over," continued Frank, not noticing his silence; "dad
and mother would be ever so glad to have you, and so would sis, if your
sweetheart ain't stuck up; is she?"

"No," replied Manson, "she's just a sensible, everyday sort of a girl,
and as sweet and loving as you can imagine. Your folks would like her, I
think, and I am sure she would like them."

"Why didn't you splice and bring her along in the first place?" said
Frank, laughing. "I wish you had, and then you wouldn't be looking for
Injuns in every cove. Do you remember the night we saw a man walking on
fog and thought it was a ghost, and how ten minutes after that same
ghost took a shot at us?"

"I do," answered Manson, looking serious as the memory of that
experience came back, "and I recall the next night, too, when we sat by
the camp fire and swapped ghost stories, and you told me about a haunted
island down here. Where is it?"

"Do you see that little patch of green away out beyond Spoon Island?"
answered Frank, pointing seaward. "Well, that's the famous Pocket Island
that I told you about, and the abiding-place of not only a bellowing
bull's ghost, but lots of others as well. When we are likely to have a
good spell of weather I am going to take you out there and" (with a
laugh) "give you a chance to satisfy your mania for ghost hunting, for I
believe that is one of your hobbies."

"Well, not so much as it was when we carried a musket," said Manson,
"for I am not as superstitious as I was then. Still, I want to see your
haunted island just the same and hear that strange noise. Is there a
harbor there where we can run in?"

"Yes, and a queer freak of nature it is, too," answered Frank, "but I do
not know the channel in, and would not dare to try to enter. All I can
do is to wait for a fair day and lay outside while Obed takes you
ashore."

That night when Manson had retired he lay awake a long time thinking
over the interesting impressions made upon him by his visit, and
especially the suggestion that he at some time should bring Liddy down
here as his wife! That alone was such an entrancing thought that he
could not go to sleep when he tried to. What a new world it would be to
take her into, and what supreme delight to show her these beautiful
islands and placid coves, and the bold cliffs at the foot of which the
white-crested billows were beating! How he would enjoy seeing her open
her big, blue eyes with wonder and sweet surprise at all the grand and
beautiful bits of scenery and all the magic and mystery of the ocean,
far removed from man!

"Some day I will bring her here," he thought, and then he fell asleep
and dreamed he heard the ominous sound of some monster bellowing in
anger.




CHAPTER XXIII.

BIG SPOON ISLAND.


The next morning our young friends prepared for a three days' trip on
their little sloop. For a week they had discussed it and had carefully
considered when it was best to go.

"I want to wait till the moon fulls," Frank had said, "for then the
weather will be better, and as our friend Manson is in a romantic frame
of mind, he will enjoy it all the more."

Everything likely to be needed was put on board their boat; provisions,
water, extra clothing, guns, fishing gear, and also, it must be said, a
bottle of good old whiskey, for on such a trip it might be even more
needful than food.

"We will take along the banjo," Obed said, for he was quite an expert
with that cheerful instrument, "and evenings we can have some darkey
songs."

"What is the program?" asked Manson, when everything was stowed, the
sails set, and with Frank at the helm they were gliding out of the
little island harbor. "Where are we going?"

"Well," replied Frank, "I think we will run to Big Spoon Island first
and try for mackerel. There is a nice little harbor there if it comes on
to blow, and two miles out are some good cod grounds. I suppose you
would like to visit Pocket Island?"

"I would like to just call there," said Manson, "for you have excited my
curiosity. I have a weakness for ghost hunting, you told me once, and
now you must gratify it, you see."

There is, perhaps, no pleasanter way for three or four young men to
spend a day or two than to have a tidy little yacht all to themselves,
and sail her away off among the Maine coast islands, with a summer day
breeze and clear skies to cheer them.

To feel themselves just lifted over the broad ground swells, ruffled by
a light wind that smells sweet and crisp; to watch some distant green
island gradually coming nearer, or the seagulls lighting on the water
just ahead, or the white clouds in the blue sky, and with no sense of
danger, but only the care-free buoyancy of youth and good spirits, is to
many the very acme of enjoyment. At least, it was to Manson, to whom
such an experience was entirely new. When they reached Spoon Island he
went into raptures over it, for it was a rarity, even among the many
beautiful ones he had visited. As its name implied, it was shaped like a
spoon, about five hundreds rods long and formed of white sand, with a
growth of green sedge grass all over it. On the broadest part was a
cluster of spruce forming a little thicket and beside this, and entered
by a narrow inlet the tiniest bit of a harbor, just large enough to
shelter a small sloop. The seagulls had also discovered its beauty, for
thousands hovered about it, and the small harbor was alive with them.
The island was a favorite nesting-place for them as well, and their
shrill cries at being disturbed almost obliterated the voice of the
ocean.

"We will anchor under the lee," said Frank, as they drew near, "and try
for mackerel, and then run into the harbor, make everything snug, and
stay here to-night, or"--with a droll look at Manson--"perhaps you would
prefer to go to Pocket Island and have ghosts for company!"

"This is good enough for me," replied Manson, "and I guess the gulls
will be the more cheerful companions!"

When the sloop was at anchor, sails furled, and they were all waiting
for mackerel bites, he said: "What is there so mysterious about this
Pocket Island, and why are people afraid to go there? Tell me all about
it! You have got me so worked up over it, I dreamed I heard a bull
bellowing last night."

"Well," replied Frank, "it's like all ghost stories and spook spots in
the world; all imagination, I guess. I do not take any stock in them,
and dad laughs at the entire batch. The only reality about it is that
the island itself is the most forbidding pile of rock, covered with the
worst tangle of scrub spruce you ever saw, and the shore is full of deep
fissures and cracks. The one mysterious fact is, that strange bellowing
noise that you can't locate anywhere. You may clamber all over the
island and all around the shores and it seems to be just ahead of you,
or just behind; so far as the stories go, well; the queer harbor inside
is said to have been a smuggler's hiding-place years ago, and there are
all kinds of yarns connected with the island, from bloody murders down
to strange sea monsters seen crawling over the rocks. It has a bad name
and is seldom visited; for one reason, I think, because it's impossible
to land there except in a small boat, and then only when the sea is
smooth. The bellowing noise, I believe, is made by the waves entering
some cavern below high-water mark. There is also an odd sort of a story
linked with it about a little Jew who was known to be a smuggler and who
played a sharp trick on a few people ten or twelve years ago. I do not
think he had any connection with the island, however, although some say
he had. I fancy it's because any ghost-haunted spot always attracts all
the mysterious stories told in its neighborhood."

All this was interesting to Manson, and not only added a charm to all
the islands he had visited, but made him especially anxious to explore
this one.

"Do not laugh at me," he said when Frank had finished his recital, "for
expecting to see Indians paddling canoes among your islands when your
people down here believe all the ghost stories they do. My fancy is only
the shadow of what was certainly a reality not so very long ago; while
your stories are spook yarns of the most hobgoblin shape. I want to go
to Pocket Island, however," he added a little later, reflectively, "and
hear that mysterious bellowing anyhow."

That evening when the sloop was riding quietly at anchor in the little
Spoon Island harbor and the full moon just rising, round and red, out of
the sea, Obed brought his banjo on deck and away out there, miles from
any other island, and mingling with the murmur of the ocean's voice
about this one, there came the strains of old, familiar plantation songs
sung by those three young friends, at peace with all the world and happy
in their seclusion. The gulls had gone to rest, the sea almost so, for
the ground swell only washed the island's sandy shore and idly rocked
the sloop as she rode secure at anchor. The moon and the man in it both
smiled, and when Manson and Frank, wearied of singing, lived over once
more the battle scenes they had passed through, feeling that never again
could they or would they be called upon to face such danger, it may be
said that they were as near contentment as often comes in life. And if
the droll look of the man in the moon brought back to one a certain
night years before, when, as a bashful boy, he could hardly find courage
to kiss a blue-eyed girl whom he had walked home with, and who had since
become very dear to him, it is not surprising. Neither was it at all
strange, if, when looking seaward, that night, he could see far away in
the broadening path of silvery sheen, a small, dark island; that he
should feel it held a mystery; and that some occult influence had linked
that uncanny place, in some way not as yet understood, with his own past
and future; that it was some link, some tangible spot, some queer
connection between dreams and hopes that might develop into real facts.

While not what is usually called superstitious, Manson could not
understand why he had from the very first mention of this island, felt
an unaccountable influence attracting him toward it. What it was he
could not tell, and yet every hour seemed to bind this influence all the
closer, and as it were, cast its spell over him. When they all turned in
for the night, he could not go to sleep. His thoughts would go back to
that horrible night on the battlefield when he, in his agonies, fancied
himself wading down a cool, clear brook; then to the strange influence
Liddy had said she felt when, in keeping a foolish promise, she had all
alone paid a visit to Blue Hill, and now this weird spell of enchantment
that was growing upon him. Was there some mysterious plot in his life
that was being unfolded step by step, and one that was far beyond his
comprehension? Was his chance meeting with this friend, Frank, on the
picket line, a part of it? Was the imperative inclination to always take
Liddy away to the top of Blue Hill when he wished to speak to her very
soul, also due to some incomprehensible power that was shaping and
bending their lives together? That they were, and must be as one in the
future--as long as life lasted, he believed as firmly as he believed he
lived, and yet beyond that belief there was--and here he met an
impassable barrier and could go no further, only realizing that he was
being led by an unseen force. Was it a power that was pushing him toward
Pocket Island? He could not tell.




CHAPTER XXIV.

POCKET ISLAND.


When the sun rose red and sullen the next morning, and our three friends
had breakfasted and were hoisting sail on the sloop, Frank said:

"If the wind holds up as it did yesterday, we can run to Pocket Island
and back easily. There is no chance to land"--addressing Manson--"or
even to go within half a mile of it in the sloop; but I can lay her to
while Obed rows ashore in the dory. One hour there will give you all the
ghost hunting you want, I guess. The only thing I don't like is the way
the sun looked this morning. Old Sol appeared mad!"

When they were under way and the sloop was heeling over before the fresh
morning breeze, Manson said: "I do not want you to take any chances on
my account, Frank. We can go there some other day."

"Oh, I'll take no risks," replied his friend. "It's not the wind that
worries me, for we can reef close, and the sloop takes big seas like a
duck. It's these beastly coast fogs that come in without warning and
absolutely bury you. If the wind shifts, then your compass is the only
salvation."

Manson was silent, for he was only a passenger, and as his friend's
guest, he felt it unwise to offer any suggestion.

"We are all right," continued Frank, scanning the horizon, "so long as
the wind holds this way, for we can beat up to the island by noon, and
have a fair run back."

Manson was in no mood for talking, for the strange strain of reflections
that had come to him the night before still oppressed him and he
silently watched the little island ahead growing nearer. When they were
within a mile of it, the wind began to drop away and by the time they
could see the many rocks that surrounded it, rising like black fangs out
of the white froth of the wave wash, it died out entirely.

Frank looked anxious. "You had better," he said, addressing Manson, "eat
a bite while Obed and I furl the jib and lower the tops'l. He can then
row you ashore in the dory. I do not like the way the wind acts."

When Manson started for the island in the small boat he was almost
ready to give his visit up, for the little look of anxiety on his
friend's face, coupled with the ugly-looking reefs between which Obed
was rowing him, and the forbidding shores of the island itself, made a
strange feeling of fear creep over him. Beneath it, however, was that
queer influence that, like a beckoning spirit, seemed to lure him
forward in spite of himself.

"I'll land you on the lee side," said Obed, as he pulled into a narrow
opening between two cliffs, "and wait here for you while you go across
to the harbor on the other side. It will save time, and I can keep an
eye on the sloop."

That Obed felt it necessary to watch the sloop was not reassuring to
Manson, but, bidding him good-bye cheerfully, he leaped ashore. When he
had made his way up over the confusion of rocks that confronted him, and
out of sight of the dory, he stopped and listened. It was a silent and
desolate spot, but, true to his expectations, as he passed there he
caught the sound of a low, moaning bellow that rose and fell, almost
dying away, and seemed to come from the farther side of the island. He
looked and listened, and then, with a parting glance at the sloop half a
mile away, started over the island. He soon found he had been rightly
informed, for its surface was the worst tangle of rocks and scrub spruce
thick between them he ever saw or heard of. He crawled in a little way
and then retraced his steps and followed the shore, but even that was
almost impassable. He worked his way slowly along, until all at once,
when he had climbed a ledge, he found himself looking down into what
seemed like a sunken lake surrounded by a wall, with a narrow opening on
the seaward side, and so still that not a ripple disturbed its surface.
Cautiously he crawled down to the edge and glanced about! The spot
seemed to fascinate him, and as he gazed at the irregular cliff wall
shutting him in, he felt he had descended into a den infested by evil
spirits!

Then he started around the shore of this harbor, avoiding the
weed-covered rocks, for the tide was low, and as he was slowly moving
along, he came suddenly upon a keg caught between two rocks, and just
above high-water mark. Its staves were warped and gaping, and when he
stooped to lift it they fell apart and disclosed another keg inside.
This he found was heavy, and as he stood it on end he discovered it was
filled with some liquid. For a moment he was dazed by the discovery,
and then he turned it around till he came to a piece of metal midway
between the rusted hoops, and this he pried off with his knife and found
it covered a small bung. Trembling with excitement at this mysterious
find, he hunted for a pointed stone, and with it drove the bung in, when
to his intense surprise he was saluted by the well-known odor of rum!

For an instant his heart almost stopped beating, as there flashed
through his mind all the vague tales of this island having been a
smuggler's hiding-place long before, and then he looked quickly about
him. Naught was visible save the frowning rock walls and the still cove.
Then he stooped again and inserted a finger in the keg and smelled and
then tasted! Rum it was, and no mistake, and the best he had ever
sipped! But what a find! And what a place to find it in! He looked about
him again. Crusoe, when he came upon the footprints in the sand, was not
more surprised than Manson at this moment.

Unconscious of the lapse of time, or where he was, or how he came there,
he gazed upon that harmless keg as if it held some ghastly secret
instead of rum! Where did it come from? Who brought it there? Why had
it been concealed in an outer shell? What did it all mean, and was he
about to make some horrible discovery? Once more he looked about, and
then in an instant, he found himself staring at a dark opening beneath
an overhanging shelf of rock not two rods away! Breathless with
excitement now, and feeling himself yielding to some dread spell, he
almost sprang to the spot, and oblivious of weed-covered rocks and mud,
he went down on his hands and knees and peered in. It was a cave
opening, sure enough! Trembling still, and yet lured by a weird
fascination, he crawled in a short distance and then paused. The hole
looked larger inside, and as his eyes grew accustomed to the gloom he
could see it sloped upward. He felt for a match, and lighting it tried
to peer further in. The match burned out and left him unable to see as
far as before. Then reason began to assert itself, and he turned and
crawled out, realizing the folly of trying to explore a cave with
lighted matches as an aid.

When once more he stood upright outside a strange thing had happened.
Not only had the tide crept up almost to the cave entrance, but the sun
was no longer visible, and as he looked up to the top of the rock wall
that environed him, a white pall of fog was slowly settling down and
hiding all things. He looked at his watch. He had been on the island
over four hours! With sudden fear he started around the way he had come,
and when he reached the keg of rum an inspiration almost, made him lift
and carry it to a place of safety, well above high-tide mark. Then he
retraced his steps to where he had left Obed, but the dory had gone and
no one was there, and to add to the situation, the fog had so shut the
island in that he could not see two rods over the water. He hallooed
again and again, but received no answer.

He was alone on Pocket Island with not a morsel to eat, not a blanket to
cover him, night coming on, and a fog so thick that he could not see a
rod ahead! Even all this did not for one moment obliterate that
mysterious keg or cave discovery from his mind, but he felt that he must
take steps at once to protect himself from coming night, and darkness,
and possible rain, for he knew that when the fog lifted, his friends
would return. The first thing was to build himself a shelter, and then a
fire. Here his army experience came in well, and he searched until he
found two rocks with a level space between, and laying sticks across
and cutting spruce boughs to pile over them and others to serve as a
bed, he soon made ready a place to at least crawl into when night came.

Hunger began to assert itself, but food was out of the question. That
keg of rum came to his mind as he worked, however, and when the rude
shelter was complete he searched the rocky shores for some large shell,
or anything that would hold a small portion of the liquor. He found a
cocoanut that the sea had kindly cast up among the rocks, and cutting
one end off with his pocket-knife, and digging out the interior, he once
more returned where he had left the mysterious keg.

Twilight was near and the dark cave entrance and frowning walls about
the little harbor seemed more ominous than ever. He made haste to fill
his rude cup with rum and return to his shelter. Then he gathered fuel,
for fire at least would be a little company, and a strange dread of
spending the coming night alone there on that haunted island was
creeping over him. He did not believe in ghosts, but when he thought of
the peculiar sequence of events, mingled with a slowly growing belief
that some mysterious power was leading him--he knew not whither--a
feeling that he was soon to face some ghastly experience, came like an
icy hand grasping his in the dark. He could not shake that feeling off,
and as he gathered driftwood, bits of dead spruce--anything that would
burn, and piled the fuel near his shelter--his dread increased. What
strange spell was it that had kept him four hours beside that
wall-enclosed harbor unconscious of the lapse of time? Why had he not
seen the fog coming until too late? And that keg and cave!--what did all
these mysteries mean? Then, searching further along the shore for
driftwood, he came suddenly upon a tangle of wreckage piled high among
the rocks. It would serve as fuel, and he began to drag large pieces to
his shelter. Three trips he made, and was just lifting the end of a
broken spar, when right at his feet, and half-buried in the sand, he saw
a white object. The night was fast approaching and he was in a hurry,
but some impulse made him stoop, and there in the gathering gloom he
saw--a grinning human skull!




CHAPTER XXV.

THE SMUGGLER'S CAVE.


Manson had faced death on the battlefield when comrades were falling
beside him; he had paced for hours on the picket-line in the darkness of
night, feeling that at any moment an enemy might fire at him from some
thicket or from behind some tree or rock; but amid all these dangers he
had not felt the nameless horror that came to him as he saw that hideous
skull grinning at him there in the tangle of wreckage just at dusk on
Pocket Island. It was like a hand reaching out from a grave, or a voice
calling to him from a tomb. Alone on that little, sea-grit isle,
trembling beneath the waves that beat upon it, and in the fast-gathering
darkness he stood for a moment spellbound. All the ghostly tales he had
been told of this spot came to him in an instant and with the force of
truth, and had he at that moment beheld some spectral figure rise from
among the black rocks he would not have been surprised. Then feeling
his strength leaving him, he turned and ran as fast as he could back to
where he had built the shelter. With trembling hands he managed to start
a fire and sat down beside it. It was a little comfort, but not enough
to drive away the dread that seemed to increase as the night grew
blacker. He dared not use his small stock of fuel except sparingly,
fearing it would not last till morning, and he should be left in total
darkness. Back of him was the impassable thicket, and in front the
rock-bound shore, and as he listened to the booming of the surges he
could see, just in the edge of the zone of light, those eyeless sockets
and that mocking grin ever hovering near. Then as the night wore on and
the wind increased, slowly rising and falling and rising again, each
time a little louder, came that ominous, bellowing sound. It was not
like that of any creature he had ever heard or dreamed of, but rather
the menace of some horrible monster unknown to earth or air. All the
stories of hideous shapes that dwelt beneath the ocean waves, and all
the old legends of the sea and its unknown denizens, came to him, and
ever mingling with these phantasms that seemed to be crawling all about
was that grinning skull.

Solitude and night on a lonely shore, far removed from human kind,
inevitably produces in the mind strange effects. All ordinary reasoning
is set at naught and common sense goes astray. The nearness of the
unknown and unapproachable ocean; the ever varying and menacing sounds
that issue from it; the leaping and curling billows that, like white and
black demons, seem trying to engulf the earth and make even the rocks
tremble--all have a weird and uncanny influence. In their presence the
imagination runs riot and the ghostly and supernatural usurp reason.
Spectral shapes crawl out of dark fissures and leap from rock to rock
and hideous sea monsters creep in the verge of shadows. To be alone on a
small island of evil repute and many miles out in the ocean, as Manson
was, was to have this weird influence more than doubled. At times, when
reason seemed trembling in the balance, he fancied himself hovering over
the battlefield where he had lain for hours suffering indescribable
agony; and looking at the ghastly faces of dead men in the moonlight! He
could see their white teeth showing in mocking grin and their glazed
eyes staring at him! Here and there were parts of bodies: a head in one
place, an arm and hand in another! Then he could see himself sitting
upon the ground amid thick bushes, and resting in his lap was a boy's
face, the eyes looking up into his in piteous appeal! How well he could
recall every moment of that half-hour of dumb anguish and the last fight
for life that dying boy had made! He could see the blood gush from his
lips at every breath drawn in desperate effort, and feel the tight clasp
of his hands and oh! the awful dread of coming death in his eyes! Then
the last earthly effort when the poor boy had, in gratitude at sight of
a pitying face, kissed the hand that killed him!

To Manson's keen imagination it seemed as if Fate had led him to this
horrible spot to go mad and die alone, tortured by remorse and despair.

As he sat by his one companion, the little fire, all that long night,
trying to fight back the imaginary horrors that menaced him, one
constant thought weighed heaviest upon his feelings, and that was that
some uncomprehended motive force was shaping his every action and
asserting itself more and more. What evil was in store for him, or what
fate was to come, was a greater burden than all the rest. How long that
night was no pen can describe, and when the first faint tinge of morning
light came, he felt that nothing in life was quite so blessed as
daylight. The fog was still thick, but the hideous darkness, with all
its terrors, was passed, and with the light came a bit of returning
courage. He had sipped from the cup of rum at times through the night,
but had felt no effect, and now he was faint from need of food. He
hunted the shore, where clams could be found, and securing a few roasted
and ate them. Then once more came the uncanny fascination of that cave!
He dreaded to go near it, and yet could not keep away. It was like a
voice calling to him that must be answered. But how to enter without a
light! Once more he thought of that keg, and going to the pile of
wreckage, found pieces of rope, and moistening one end of a bit in the
rum that was left in his cup, set it on fire. It burned slowly but
steadily, and now he felt he had means to enter the cave. With a few
pieces of this rope he made his way down to where the keg was, and
soaked them well in the rum. Then he paused and looked around. The
frowning walls seemed more menacing than ever, and that black hole just
beyond, which he had tried to enter the day before, glared at his like
a huge eye of sinister import. He thought of the ghastly skull he had
found the night before, and wondered if it had any connection with this
cave. Cautiously, step by step, he crept toward it. Was it the
hiding-place of some sea monster, and was death there in that dark
cavern awaiting him? Once again he felt his courage leaving and a
strange weakness stealing his strength. He turned back and sat down by
the keg.

Given the right conditions, and our imaginations will surround us with
hobgoblins and spectres by day as well as night, and almost upset the
reasoning power of strong men. To Manson, who had passed one long,
sleepless night full of imaginary terrors, and believing himself
governed and controlled by some supernatural power, the experience he
had passed through, and the impulses that were now alternately pulling
him back and pushing him toward that dark cave in front of him, he felt
must be ill-omened and uncanny. For an hour he sat and looked at his
surroundings, trying to reason away his fears and convince himself they
were groundless, and that all the stories he had heard about this island
being haunted were purely imaginary. Only partially did he succeed,
however, and then, at last yielding to the fascination that constantly
drew him toward the cave, arose and once more cautiously crept toward
it.

At the entrance he paused and listened. Not a sound could be heard
except the faint voice of the ocean outside. He stooped and took one
step inward, and listened again. All he could hear now was the beating
of his own heart. He lit one of his torches and then another. Then he
took two steps more and paused again. The faint light showed the cavern
sloped sharply upward. Carefully, on his knees, supporting himself by
one hand, he crawled up the incline until the floor became level and
then he stood upright. For a moment he halted there, trying to peer into
the inky darkness. He seemed to be looking into a wide, open space; a
peculiar odor tainted the air. He took a few steps and paused again.
Then he turned one of his torches down inward to increase the flame, and
as it burned brighter he held it above his head. Now he could see the
wall of rock all about, and on the further side and close to the wall, a
large boulder. Then, as his eyes grew accustomed to the semi-darkness,
he could see the floor formation, and as its outlines grew more
distinct, he caught the gleam of white teeth grinning at him from some
creature almost at his feet! Breathless now, and trembling, he lowered
his torch, and beheld prostrate there in front of him two shriveled and
blackened corpses!




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE FATE OF A MISER.


As Manson gazed in horror at those two charred bodies reduced to
skeletons in that dark cave, he felt more than ever that his every step
for many days had been in obedience to some mysterious power that had at
last brought him face to face with danger and death.

For one instant the impulse to turn from that ghastly sight and leave
the cave came to him, but the baleful fascination of those hideous
objects held him prisoner. He could not if he would turn away. One of
the skeletons, for such they almost were, was that of a tall man, face
up, the grinning teeth fully exposed; the other of smaller size, with
legs and arms drawn together. No signs of clothing were visible on
either, and the flesh appeared to have shrunk away, showing the shape of
every bone. Midway between them lay a rusted pistol and just beyond,
glistening in the faint light, were bits of glass. When his eyes grew
accustomed to the sickening sight he raised them, looked around, and for
the first time saw, a few feet away, a raised, table-like rock, and on
it piles of round dark bits of metal. Taking two steps he stooped, and
picking up one of these pieces held it close to the light. It was a
twenty-dollar gold piece!

Wonder succeeded horror! What mystery was this? Two charred skeletons
beside a pile of gold in this dark and silent cavern! Was it some
infernal dream or a reality? He stooped and picked up more of the coins.
Gold, every one! Then he examined others and found silver dollars and
halves. He turned and looked about, holding one torch above his head,
and almost expecting to see some spectral form half-hid in the shadows.
Only the faintly outlined walls of rock could be seen. Then, feeling
faint and weak from the intense strain, he hastily retraced his steps
down and out of the cave. He was just in time, for the rising tide had
almost cut off his exit. So weak now that he could hardly walk, he crept
around to the keg and sat down to think. Then for the first time he
looked at the sky and saw the sun faintly visible through the fog. What
a blessed sight it was! He had never known before how good the sun
could look to a poor, hungry, horror-struck mortal! Then he picked up a
shell, and pouring a little of the rum out of the keg, drank it. It had
a magic effect, for it brought back his strength and courage and a
realization of what he had discovered. In the dread experiences he had
just passed through, he had not comprehended what it meant to him. Now
he did.

He, alone on that haunted island, abhorred and shunned by all, had found
a fortune!

He drank a little more of the rum. Then he thought of his friends. Maybe
at that very moment they were nearing the island!

He quickly clambered out of the walled-in pocket, and looked over the
ocean. The fog was lifting, the wind rising, but no sail was visible. He
was still a prisoner. Once more he heard that strange bellowing coming
from somewhere beneath the island, but it had lost its terrors. He
thought of those skeletons in the dark cavern, and only felt curious to
know how those two human beings met their death. A thousand bulls, for
aught he cared now, might bellow all they chose, so long as they did not
show their horns above the rocks, and two or two dozen skeletons more or
less in the cave made no difference. He had met and conquered the ghost
of Pocket Island, and was himself once more.

He took one long look all around, where the white, crested waves were
rolling as far as the eye could reach; then at the sun now shining
bright and warm, and then returned to the cave. The entrance was half
under water, but the tide was falling, and he boldly waded in. He was so
eager now he could hardly wait to light a torch, and when once more
inside, he did not even stop to look at the hideous skeletons, but went
directly to the flat rock where the stacks of coin were; removed his
coat, heaped all he could carry upon it, and returned to the sunlight.
Wildly excited now, he carried his bundle to a flat shelf of rock near
where he had first descended into "The Pocket," emptied it and returned
for more. Three trips he made to secure his wondrous find, and when the
last mildewed and tarnished bit of money was secured, he took the pistol
and left the cave for good. Then, feeling a little faint and weak, he
sat down on the shelf beside his pile of gold and silver, and examined
the rusty weapon.

On the stock was engraved the name of "Wolf."

Then, as that miser had many years before stacked and counted those same
pieces of money, so did Manson now stack and count them.

But what a contrast!

Wolf had counted with murder in his heart, and feeling only the miser's
lust of possession as he hid himself in that dark cavern. Manson
counted, thinking only of one good and true girl waiting for him, and
feeling that every one of those bits of money were but so many keys to
open the door of his dream of wife and home and all the blessings he
longed to surround that one loved woman with. And as he counted where
God's sunlight fell upon him, and not in darkness, fearing enemies, so
was that money destined to be a blessing and not a curse. When the count
was made, and that poor, hungry fellow, with naught to aid him in the
battle of life except two hands and a brave heart, found himself the
possessor of sixteen thousand dollars, he felt like offering a prayer of
thankfulness.

He no longer cared that he was faint with hunger, or that he was still a
prisoner on that lone island. All he thought of was to await the coming
of his friends with patience; end his visit as soon as possible; return
to Liddy, and tell her of his wondrous find, and the fortune that was
theirs to enjoy. But he was not to escape that day, for the wind still
blew almost a gale, and the waves still cut him off from rescue. When
the tide fell he dug clams, and when night came he sat by his little
fire, roasted and ate them, and was happy. That night he saw no spectral
shapes or grinning skulls, and when his fire burned low he crept into
his shelter and slept in peace and content. When the morning came only a
summer-day breeze ruffled the ocean, and, most gladsome sight of all,
only a few miles away was the sloop, with all sails set, and heading
directly for the island! When Frank came ashore in the dory there was a
joyful meeting.

"We had to put up sail and run for a harbor to save the sloop when we
saw the fog coming," said Frank, "and leave you behind. It was that or
desert her and come ashore. I am awfully glad to find you safe, though.
Obed waited as long as he dared. Where were you, and what were you doing
so long?"

"Trying to find a ghost," replied Manson, who felt like joking now, "and
I succeeded. I not only found ghosts by the dozen, but two skeletons,
and one or two skulls scattered around to make things more cheerful. Oh,
I've had a real sociable time, I assure you! One of those kind of times
when every way you turn a still more hideous object confronts you; a fit
of the jims minus the fun that goes before it. The first night I was so
scared I didn't sleep a wink, and the spooks were so thick I dared not
turn around for fear of seeing a new one. Your island deserves all that
has been said of it, and a good deal more. I've found what's better than
ghosts, however!"

When Frank had followed his friend over into "The Pocket," and saw what
he had found and heard the marvelous story, he gasped for breath.

"So that is what became of the little Jew smuggler, is it?" he said when
he saw the pistol; "and the story was true after all! My stars! but you
are in luck," he continued, as he looked at the stacks of coin; and
then, slapping Manson on the back, hilariously exclaimed: "Ghost hunting
pays once in a while, old fellow, don't it? Now you can get married and
come down here and stay all next summer, can't you?"

Then the two friends, happy as children escaped from school, returned to
the sloop, and after half-starved Manson had eaten as he never did
before, they all three went ashore and visited the cave.

"As near as I can recall the story," said Frank, when they stood looking
at the skeletons, "there was an Indian who acted as helper for the Jew,
and this tall fellow with the horrible grin may have been that poor
fellow. Most likely they got into a quarrel over the money, and fought
it out to the death. Great Scott! but what a grim duel that must have
been here in this dark cavern!"

When they had looked the cave all over, they carried Manson's strangely
found fortune aboard the sloop, and sailed for home. Two days later he
bade adieu to his friend and departed two weeks sooner than he had
planned, but not until he had made a solemn promise to return the next
summer and bring a companion.




CHAPTER XXVII.

CONCLUSION.


The maples in front of Liddy's home were just showing the first tints of
autumn color when Manson returned. It had been a long three weeks of
separation to her, and her first words contained a note of reproach.

"You might have written me once or twice, Charlie," she said; "the days
have seemed so long!"

"I could not," he replied; "I was lost to the world on an island twenty
miles from a post office, and letters were not in style there. The
people are so far removed from the world they do not seem to think
communication of any value. It is a wild and romantic spot, and the only
thing I do not like about it is every house has two or three tombstones
close by."

He seemed in a surprisingly cheerful mood, and described his visit and
the friends he had met in glowing words. One incident of his visit,
however, he withheld, and for a purpose. The little, half-jesting remark
Liddy had made a month previous on Blue Hill--a remark merely expressive
of her pride--still lingered in his mind, and he was resolved to test
that pride in his own peculiar way.

A short distance from her house and near the brook was a rustic seat
beneath the maple. Many hours she had passed there with him, and many
more alone with only sad thoughts for company, when the brook's music
seemed a voice of sympathy. Even when a child she had learned to love
this spot, and the low, sweet murmur of the stream. Early that evening,
when the full moon had just appeared over Blue Hill, they intuitively
sought this familiar place. Perhaps the joy in their hearts added a new
charm, for the ripples in the brook appeared like so many laughing water
sprites dancing there in the silvery light. For a few moments they
silently yielded to the magic witchery of the time and place, and then
she could contain herself no longer. She had noticed his unusual
elation--even more than could be ascribed to his gladness at being once
more beside her, and, grown accustomed to his ways, knew there was a
surprise in store.

"Well, Charlie," she said at last, with a bright smile, "you need not
wait to take me up to Blue Hill this time to tell your story. Tell it
now. You have some good news, for I can see it in your face. What is
it?"

He looked at her a moment in silence, and then answered:

"Yes, I have a story to tell you, and one that will more than surprise
you, but first I have a question to ask. Do you remember the promise you
made me a month ago?"

The thought of that tender pledge and his now evident intention to ask
its fulfillment brought the color to her face, but she bravely answered:
"I have never made a promise and failed to keep it. I shall not begin
now."

Then, as the question he asked and the answer he received were heard
only by the elfin sprites dancing in the brook beside them, so we will
leave it to those fairies to tell if they choose. Suffice it to say it
was such as filled his heart so full of happiness it could no longer
hold a secret, and there, where the moonlight fell in little rifts upon
them, and the music of running water echoed their feelings, he told her
the strange story of Pocket Island, and what he had found in the cave.

When late that evening they returned to the house, never again in their
lives did the man in the moon seem to smile so graciously or the brook
sound so sweet.

Then one day--a day bright above all others to them, when nature seemed
aglow with joyous color--all those who were near and dear gathered to
listen to their vows, and wish them well in life. Whether those kind
wishes were deserved or not, and whether the Fates that direct the steps
of all human kind led theirs along the pleasant walks of prosperity and
happiness, or among the rocks and thorns of adversity, we will leave to
the imagination of those who have read this story, for here their
history ends.

It is told that when Jove, the mythological ruler of the universe,
conceived the creation of the human race, he sent Pandora to the realms
of Pluto to bring him the box containing all the good and evil impulses
he intended to select from in his creative work. He gave her strict
orders not to open the box, lest its contents escape and work woe to the
coming mortals. But as woman's curiosity never was restrained by any
power, human or divine, since Mother Eve ate apples, and most likely
never will be, no sooner had Pandora set out upon her return than she
lifted the lid of that fatal box, and the result to the human race need
not be enlarged upon. One good result came from her disobedience,
however, for, seeing her error in time, she closed the cover before Hope
escaped, and so that blessed impulse came to be shared alike by mortals.

Life at best is but an enigma, and like children pursuing an Ignis
Fatuus, so do we all pursue the illusive beacon light of a brighter and
happier to-morrow--always hoping, never attaining, though striving ever
until, wearied of the vain pursuit, at last we fall by the wayside and
are forgotten.

                                 THE END.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                  _Now Read The Great New England Novel_
                              UNCLE TERRY
                         By CHARLES CLARK MUNN

"I wa'n't consulted 'bout comin' into this world, an' I don't expect
ter be 'bout goin' out."
                                                         --UNCLE TERRY.

"I take some comfort livin' an' try to pass it along."
                                                         --UNCLE TERRY.

                         Richly Bound Gilt Top
                           Fully Illustrated
                               370 Pages
                              Price $1.50

                        A Fascinating Love Story

                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                     202 Devonshire Street, Boston

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                              UNCLE TERRY
                     _The Great New England Novel_

Boston _Herald_:
     "The author writes in a frank, indulgent, and hearty manner,
     skilfully outlining his characters."

Boston _Transcript_:
     "It is a sincere and unpretending study of life, wrought with
     care."

Pittsburg _Bulletin_:
     "The plot is well contrived, and the tale draws the reader along
     with increasing interest until the end."

Boston _Saturday Evening Gazette_:
     "The author has a keen knowledge of character, and it is abundantly
     displayed in his novel."

Springfield _Republican_:
     "'Uncle Terry' is an 'original Yankee,' full of native wit and
     humor, genial, kind-hearted, and full of the milk of human
     kindness."

Providence _News_:
     "Mr. Munn's people and the scenery of his tale will be readily
     recognized by thousands."

                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                                 BOSTON

-----------------------------------------------------------------------


                              UNCLE TERRY
                     _The Great New England Novel_

_Worcester Magazine_:
     "Infinitely superior to the lurid 'sword-play' novels that have had
     such a vogue."

St. Paul _Globe_:
     "Like the scent of lavender arising from things fresh and old, this
     story comes."

Rochester _Herald_:
     "Before you have gone through the first chapter of 'Uncle Terry'
     you are firmly convinced that you are going to like it, and when
     you discover that it conceals a most interesting secret, nothing
     short of a fire-alarm would induce you to put it aside."

Springfield _Sunday Republican_:
     "A hearty and truthful tale of New England character in its best
     qualities of sturdy purpose, honest simplicity, and a certain trait
     which one might term 'sweetness at the core.'"

Boston _Globe_:
     "The author has succeeded in filling a new niche in the quaint
     academy of immortals."

                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                                BOSTON

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                              UNCLE TERRY
                     _The Great New England Novel_

Boston _Courier_:
     "Uncle Terry is an estimable type of hardy fisherman, honest and
     plain-spoken, but manifesting in his phrasing a subtle sarcasm that
     is amusing."

Pittsburg _Chronicle-Telegraph_:
     "People who like the smell of salt air in their novels (and who
     does not?) will be pleased with 'Uncle Terry.'"

Philadelphia _Literary Era_:
     "Other sections of the country have had their great novels. New
     England character and scenery have now felt the touch of a master
     hand."

Boston _Beacon_:
     "Uncle Terry himself is a genuine creation, and his humor and
     shrewd philosophy are a constant delight."

San Francisco _Bulletin_:
     "The tone is everywhere as pure and wholesome as green fields and
     mirthful brooks, to all lovers of which the book is dedicated."

                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                                 BOSTON

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                           _In Preparation_
                               ROCKHAVEN
                        _The Story of a Scheme_
  By CHARLES CLARK MUNN, Author of "Pocket Island" and "Uncle Terry."

Mr. Munn's next book will be out in the spring of 1902, and cannot fail
to take immediate rank among the leading works of fiction. Successful as
Mr. Munn has been, his next work promises a combined strength and
sweetness that will place his name far higher. "Rockhaven" has the
crisp, salty vigor of the sea, the quaint expressions and sound
philosophy of shrewd country people, the restless drive of city life,
with the mad whirl of a modern financial crisis, all forming a most
strong and effective setting for a sweet and wholesome love story, and
one sure to please the many thousands who have already read Mr. Munn's
writings with keen interest.

The development of the financial "scheme" which forms the basis of the
story, and its stupendous success and corresponding crash, are handled
with intense dramatic force, and many salient points of modern life are
forcefully but sensibly discussed. The stress of the "street," the
poetic restfulness of the sea and shore, the charm of the country, and
the saving grace of true love, all these in the hand of a master form a
book to be eagerly awaited.

           _To be ready in the spring of 1902. Price, $1.50_
                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                                 BOSTON

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                         BETTY SELDON, PATRIOT
                   _A Revolutionary Tale for Girls_

     By ADELE E. THOMPSON, Author of "Beck's Fortune." Illustrated by
     Lilian Crawford True. 12mo. Cloth. 300 pages. $1.25

It is a great deal to say of a book that it is at the same time
fascinating and noble. This is what "Betty Seldon, Patriot" is, and in
fact no one of the many who read and admired "Beck's Fortune" would
expect a book by Miss Thompson to be otherwise. Betty is a bright
Connecticut girl, happily as industrious and filial as she is
attractive. Her devotion to her father, a captain in the Continental
army, and her experience with a Tory uncle, who appears upon the
supposed death of her father and takes her to his home in Pennsylvania,
pretending to be her guardian, form the basis of the book. Historical
events are accurately traced leading up to the surrender of Cornwallis
at Yorktown, with reunion and happiness for all who deserve it. Betty is
worth a thousand of the fickle coquette heroines of some latter-day
popular novels, and the historical setting of the story is strong and
effective.

                      LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS
                                 BOSTON

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                       WAR AND ADVENTURE STORIES.
                         By EDWARD STRATEMEYER.

      _Author of the Famous "Old Glory Series," "Bound to Succeed
               Series," "Ship and Shore Series," etc._

                             FIRST VOLUME.
     BETWEEN BOER AND BRITON Or Two Boys' Adventures in South Africa.
                        Illustrated by A. B. SHUTE.
                      Cloth. 354 pages. Price, $1.25.

"The story bristles with action."--_The Outlook_.

"A stirring story of the South African war."--_The Journal_,
Indianapolis, Ind.

"The kind of story to please boys and give them a fair idea of a great
historical event."--_St. Louis Post-Despatch_.

"Throughout the book there is evidence of that sympathy for the Boer
which prevails on this side of the Atlantic."--_Chronicle_, Chicago.

                              SECOND VOLUME.
                    ON TO PEKIN Or Old Glory in China.
                        Illustrated by A. B. SHUTE.
                      Cloth. 330 pages. Price, $1.25.

"Parents can feel, in putting this book into the hands of boys
and girls, that they are going to get and hold the interest by
the strenuous adventure, and at the same time enforce those
splendid old-fashioned traits of honesty, courage, and true
all-round manliness."--_Universalist Leader_.

"A thoroughly up-to-date book, full of incidents familiar to us, which
will suit the boys as well as be of interest to their parents."--_San
Francisco Call_.

           For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent, prepaid,
                         on receipt of price by
                       LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers,
                                BOSTON.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                     THE FAMOUS "OLD GLORY SERIES."
                         By EDWARD STRATEMEYER,

      Author of "The Bound to Succeed Series," "The Ship and Shore
                             Series," etc.

       Six volumes. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, $1.25.

UNDER DEWEY AT MANILA Or the War Fortunes of a Castaway.
A YOUNG VOLUNTEER IN CUBA Or Fighting for the Single Star.
FIGHTING IN CUBAN WATERS Or Under Schley on the Brooklyn.
UNDER OTIS IN THE PHILIPPINES Or a Young Officer in the Tropics.
THE CAMPAIGN OF THE JUNGLE Or Under Lawton through Luzon.
UNDER MacARTHUR IN LUZON Or the Last Battle in the Philippines.

"A boy once addicted to Stratemeyer stays by him."--_The Living Church_.

"The boys' delight--the 'Old Glory Series.'"--_The Christian Advocate_,
New York.

"Stratemeyer's style suits the boys."--John Terhune, _Supt. of Public
Instruction_, Bergen Co., New Jersey.

"Mr. Stratemeyer is in a class by himself when it comes to writing about
American heroes, their brilliant doings on land and sea."--_Times_,
Boston.

"Mr. Stratemeyer has written a series of books which, while historically
correct and embodying the most important features of the
Spanish-American War and the rebellion of the Filipinos, are
sufficiently interwoven with fiction to render them most entertaining to
young readers."--_The Call_, San Francisco.

           For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent, prepaid,
                         on receipt of price by
                       LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers,
                                BOSTON.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pocket Island, by Charles Clark Munn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POCKET ISLAND ***

***** This file should be named 20057-8.txt or 20057-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/5/20057/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
