The Project Gutenberg EBook of The South and the National Government, by 
William Howard Taft

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The South and the National Government

Author: William Howard Taft

Release Date: November 14, 2006 [EBook #19812]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOUTH ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









The South and
the National Government


By
The Honorable William Howard Taft
President-elect of the United States


An Address
Delivered at the Dinner of the North Carolina Society
of New York, at the Hotel Astor, December 7, 1908




%Introduction%


The speech of the President-Elect at the recent annual banquet of the
North Carolina Society, New York, found a warm response in the hearts of
the Northern people, who have not failed to sympathize deeply with their
Southern fellow citizens during their long years of affliction.

The orator expresses our feelings with rare felicity, and so keenly did
his sentiments touch our hearts, it was resolved to publish his address
and send it to our fellow citizens of the South as the messenger of
peace and perfect reunion from their Northern countrymen.

Our Southern friends will note that no phase of the present unfortunate
situation is neglected by Mr. Taft; all are dealt with in a clear and
masterly manner. The North, as well as the South is enlightened as to
their respective duties toward bringing about the desirable return of
the South to its normal condition politically, so that American citizens
in all sections of our common country will again belong to both of the
great political parties, thus proving to the world that both parties
command the allegiance of good citizens in all parts of the country who
are desirous only for what they believe to be best for the good of the
nation as a whole.

The future President of our common country, North, South, East, and
West, who appeals to us, is a man of large heart, warm sympathies, and
cool brain, of sound judgment and lofty purpose, who has at heart as one
of the greatest possible triumphs of his administration the restoration
of normal political conditions in the South. Under his wise and
sympathetic leadership the writer is sanguine of success--certain of it
if the influential people of all sections give him the support he so
richly deserves in this truly patriotic mission.

ANDREW CARNEGIE.




%The Solid South%

ADDRESS BY MR. WALTER H. PAGE

IN INTRODUCING THE HONORABLE WILLIAM H. TAFT


At the Dinner of the North Carolina Society of
New York, at the Hotel Astor. December 7, 1908


Here, if nowhere else, we leave political parties and preferences alone.
But here, as everywhere else, we are patriotic men; and we North
Carolinians have as our background a community that from the first
showed a singularly independent temper. A freedom of opinion is our
heritage. We once drove a Colonial Governor who disputed our freedom of
political action to the safer shelter of the Colony of New York; and
throughout our history we have shown a sort of passion for independent
action, in spite of occasional eclipses; and that same temper shows
itself now. We are, in fact, never sure that we are right till half our
neighbors have proved that we are wrong.

We are, therefore, and have long been, much distressed by the political
solidity of the states of Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and
Pennsylvania; and we wish that it were broken--not for the sake of the
Democratic party nor for the sake of the Republican party (for the
breach would benefit each alike) but for the sake of greater freedom of
political action by our unfortunate fellow citizens who dwell there.
Where one party has too long and secure power it becomes intolerant and
the other party falls into contempt. Thus these states have become
stagnant or corrupt. For the sake of free political action we wish that
their political solidity might be broken, so that the whole conscience
and character of their people might find full political expression. What
constructive influence have they, or have they in recent years had, in
the nation's thought and political progress?

For the same reasons we have taken an especial pleasure in the recent
breaking up of Ohio, Minnesota, and Indiana--where on the same day
presidential electors of one party and governors of the other party were
chosen; for this breaking asunder of party dominance makes both parties
tolerant and careful, helping them both and showing the utmost freedom
of political action. And these states contribute much to our political
life.

By the same token we rush in where Texas and Virginia fear to tread, and
we shall welcome the impending and inevitable breaking of the Solid
South (perhaps we shall lead it), not for the sake of the Democratic
party nor for the sake of the Republican party (although it would help
each party equally), but for the sake of open-mindedness and of freedom
of political action, so that all men there may walk by thought and not
by formulas, and act by convictions and not by traditions. Where-ever
one party by long power breeds intolerance, the other falls into
contempt. And what constructive influence have the Southern States in
our larger political life? From some of them, where parties have fallen
low, we have seen men go to one national convention as a mere unthinking
personal following of a candidate even then clad in garments of twofold
defeat; and to the conventions of the other party we have sometimes seen
office-holding shepherds with their crooks drive their mottled flocks to
market. We are tired of this political inefficiency, this long
isolation, and these continued scandals; and we are tired of the
conditions that produce them. If parties are to be instruments of
civilized government, the conditions that produce such scandals must
cease. We must have in the South a Democratic party of tolerance and a
Republican party of character; and neither party must be ranged on lines
of race.

We aspire to a higher part in the Republic than can be played by men of
closed minds or of unthinking habits or by organized ignorance. We
aspire again to a share in the constructive work of the government in
these stirring days of great tasks at home and growing influence abroad.

I am leaving party politics severely alone, but I am speaking to a
national and patriotic theme. A Republican Administration or a
Democratic Administration is a passing incident in our national history.
Parties themselves shift and wane. And any party's supremacy is of
little moment in comparison with the isolation of a large part of the
Union from its proper political influence.

The manhood and the energy and the ambition of Southern men now find
effective political expression through neither party. The South,
therefore, neither contributes to the Nation's political thought and
influence nor receives stimulation from the Nation's thought and
influence. Its real patriotism counts for nothing--is smothered dumb
under party systems that have become crimes against the character and
the intelligence of the people. The South gives nothing and receives
nothing from the increasing national political achievement of every
decade. Politically it is yet a province; and we are tired of this
barren seclusion. Men who prefer complaint to achievement may regard
this as treason: let them make the most of it. We prefer a higher
station in the Union than New Hampshire and Vermont and Pennsylvania and
Arkansas hold.

From the first our commonwealth conspicuously stood for something
greater than any party, something that antedates all our parties, that
spirit of independence in political judgment and action which brought
the old thirteen states into being and made the Republic possible. And
that spirit is not dead yet.

If it cannot regain its old-time influence through one party, it will
regain it through another.

We are the descendants of men who fashioned parties in their beginning;
and, if need be, we can refashion them. For the aim of government is not
to preserve parties but to give range to free individual action in a
democracy. And it is in this spirit of national aspiration that we
welcome our distinguished guest of honor--a man now placed above
parties, and too just to regard the Republic by sections, our best
equipped citizen for the highest office in the world.

TO THE PRESIDENT-ELECT: _May his administration mark the return of
Southern character and sincerity to its old-time part in the
constructive work of government and the end forever of political
isolation from the achievements and the glory of the Union!_




%The South and the National
Government%

ADDRESS BY
THE HONORABLE WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT

PRESIDENT-ELECT OF THE UNITED STATES

North Carolina presents an admirable type of the present conditions in
the South. It offers, therefore, a suitable subject for the discussion
planned for this evening, and I count it a privilege to be present to
hear it. One, in any degree responsible for the government and welfare
of the whole country at this time in her history, must take an especial
interest in the trend of public opinion and the conditions, material and
political, of the South.

The laws of the United States have equal operation from the Canadian
border to the Gulf of Mexico. Congress has representatives from every
part of the country, including the South, whose votes are recorded upon
national legislation. Railroads do not break bulk between North and
South. Interstate commerce goes on unvexed between the one and the
other. The Post-office department distributes its mail with impartiality
on each side of Mason's and Dixon's Line. Prosperity in the North is
accompanied by prosperity in the South, and a halt in the one means a
halt in the other. Northern people meet Southern people, and find them
friendly and charming and full of graceful and grateful companionship.

What is it that sets the South apart and takes from the Southern people
the responsibilities which the members of a republic ought to share in
respect to the conduct of the National Government? Why is it that what
is done at Washington seems to be the work of the North and the West,
and not of the South? Should this state of affairs continue? These are
the questions that force themselves on those of us concerned with the
Government and who are most anxious to have a solid, united country, of
whose will the course of the Government shall be an intelligent
interpretation and expression.

We can answer these questions as the historian would, and we can explain
the situation as it is; but I don't think we can justify or excuse a
continuance of it. Looking back into the past, of course, the
explanation of the difference between the South and the other two
sections was in the institution of slavery. It is of no purpose to point
out that early in the history of the country the North was as
responsible for bringing slaves here as the South. We are not concerned
with whose fault it was that there was such an institution as slavery.
Nor are we concerned with the probability that, had the Northerners been
interested in slaves, they would have viewed the institution exactly as
the Southerners viewed it and would have fought to defend it because as
sacred as the institution of private property itself. It is sufficient
to say, as I think we all now realize, that the institution of slavery
was a bad thing and that it is a good thing to have got rid of it. It
doesn't help in the slightest degree in the present day to stir up the
embers of the controversy of the past by attempting to fix blame on one
part of the country or the other, in respect to an institution which has
gone, and happily gone, on the one hand, or in respect to the
consequences of that institution which we still have with us, on the
other. These consequences we are to recognize as a condition and a fact,
and a problem for solution rather than as an occasion for crimination or
recrimination.

Over the question of the extension of slavery the Civil War came, and
that contest developed a heroism on both sides, in the people from the
North and the people from the South, that evokes the admiration of all
Americans for American courage, self-sacrifice, and patriotism. But when
slavery was abolished by the war the excision of the cancer left a wound
that must necessarily be a long time in healing. Nearly 5,000,000 slaves
were freed; but 5 per cent. of them could read or write; a much smaller
percentage were skilled laborers. They were but as children in meeting
the stern responsibilities of life as free men. As such they had to be
absorbed into and adjusted to our civilization. It was a radical change,
full of discouragement and obstacles. Their rights were declared by the
war Amendments, the Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth. The one
established their freedom; the second their citizenship and their rights
to pursue happiness and hold property; and the third their right not to
be discriminated against in their political privileges on account of
their color or previous condition of servitude.

I am not going to rehearse the painful history of reconstruction, or
what followed it. I come at once to the present condition of things,
stated from a constitutional and political standpoint. And that is this:
That in all the Southern States it is possible, by election laws
prescribing proper qualifications for the suffrage, which square with
the Fifteenth Amendment and which shall be equally administered as
between the black and white races, to prevent entirely the possibility
of a domination of Southern state, county, or municipal governments by
an ignorant electorate, white or black. It is further true that the
sooner such laws, when adopted, are applied with exact equality and
justice to the two races, the better for the moral tone of state and
community concerned. Negroes should be given an opportunity equally with
whites, by education and thrift, to meet the requirements of eligibility
which the State Legislatures in their wisdom shall lay down in order to
secure the safe exercise of the electoral franchise. The Negro should
ask nothing other than an equal chance to qualify himself for the
franchise, and when that is granted by law, and not denied by executive
discrimination, he has nothing to complain of.

The proposal to repeal the Fifteenth Amendment is utterly impracticable
and should be relegated to the limbo of forgotten issues. It is very
certain that any party founded on the proposition would utterly fail in
a national canvass. What we are considering is something practical,
something that means attainable progress. It seems to me to follow,
therefore, that there is, or ought to be, a common ground upon which we
can all stand in respect to the race question in the South, and its
political bearing, that takes away any justification for maintaining the
continued solidity of the South to prevent the so-called Negro
domination. The fear that in some way or other a social equality between
the races shall be enforced by law or brought about by political
measures really has no foundation except in the imagination of those who
fear such a result. The Federal Government has nothing to do with social
equality. The war amendments do not declare in favor of social equality.
All that the law or Constitution attempt to secure is equality of
opportunity before the law and in the pursuit of happiness, and in the
enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. Social equality is something
that grows out of voluntary concessions by the individuals forming
society.

With the elimination of the race question, can we say that there are
removed all the reasons why the people of the South are reluctant to
give up their political solidarity and divide themselves on party lines
in accordance with their economic and political views? No. There are
other reasons, perhaps only reasons of sentiment, but with the Southern
people, who are a high-strung, sensitive, and outspoken people,
considerations of sentiment are frequently quite as strong as those of
some political or economic character. In the first place it is now
nearly forty years since the South acquired its political solidarity,
and the intensity of feeling by which it was maintained, and the
ostracism and social proscription imposed on those white Southerners who
did not sympathize with the necessity for such solidarity, could not but
make lasting impression and create a permanent bias that would naturally
outlast the reason for its original existence. The trials of the
reconstruction period, the heat of the political controversies with the
Republican party, all naturally, during the forty years, implanted so
deep a feeling in the Southern Democratic breast that a mere change of
the conditions under which this feeling was engendered could not at once
remove it. The Southern people are a homogeneous people; they preserve
their traditions; they are of the purest American stock; and the faith
of the father is handed down to the son, even after the cause of it has
ceased, almost as a sacred legacy.

Again, for a long time succeeding the war, the South continued poor. Its
development was much slower than that of the rest of the country.
Prosperity seemed to be Northern prosperity, not Southern. And, in such
a time, the trials of life of the present only accentuated the greater
trials of the past, and reminiscences of the dreadful sufferings and
privations of the war were present on every hand, and feelings that the
controversy had given rise to, remained with an intensity that hardly
seemed to be dimmed by passing time.

But times change, and men change with them in any community, however
fixed its thoughts or habits, and many circumstances have blessed us
with their influence in this matter.

The growth of the South since 1890 has been marvelous. The manufacturing
capital in 1880 was $250,000,000, in 1890, $650,000,000, in 1900,
$1,150,000,000 and in 1908, $2,100,000,000, while the value of the
manufactures increased from $450,000,000, in 1880 to $900,000,000 in
1890, to $1,450,000,000 in 1900, and to $2,600,000,000, in 1908. The
farm products in 1880 were $660,000,000, in 1890 were $770,000,000, in
1900, $1,270,000,000, in 1908 $2,220,000,000. The exports from the South
in 1880 were $260,000,000, in 1890 $306,000,000, in 1900, $484,000,000,
and in 1908, $648,000,000.

In this marvelous growth the manufactures of the South now exceed the
agricultural products, and thus a complete change has come over the
character of her industries. The South has become rich, and only the
surface of her wealth has been scratched. Her growth has exceeded that
of the rest of the country, and she is now in every way sharing in its
prosperity.

Again, the Democratic party has not preserved inviolate its traditional
doctrines as to state's rights and other issues, and has for the time
adopted new doctrines of possibly doubtful economic truth and wisdom.
Southern men, adhering to the party and the name, find themselves,
through the influence of tradition and the fear of a restoration of
conditions which are now impossible, supporting a platform and candidate
whose political and economic theories they distrust. Under these
conditions there was in the last campaign, and there is to-day
throughout the South, among many of its most intelligent citizens, an
impatience, a nervousness, and a restlessness in voting for one ticket
and rejoicing in the success of another.

Now, I am not one of those who are disposed to criticize or emphasize
the inconsistency of the position in which these gentlemen find
themselves. I believe it would be wiser if all who sympathize with one
party and its principles were to vote its ticket, but I can readily
understand the weight and inertia of the tradition and the social
considerations that make them hesitate. I believe that the movement away
from political solidity has started, and ought to be encouraged, and I
think one way to encourage it is to have the South understand that the
attitude of the North and the Republican party toward it is not one of
hostility or criticism or opposition, political or otherwise; that they
believe in the maintenance of the Fifteenth Amendment; but that, as
already explained, they do not deem that amendment to be inconsistent
with the South's obtaining and maintaining what it regards as its
political safety from domination of an ignorant electorate; that the
North yearns for closer association with the South; that its citizens
deprecate that reserve on the subject of politics which so long has
been maintained in the otherwise delightful social relations between
Southerners and Northerners as they are more and more frequently thrown
together.

In welcoming to a change of party affiliation many Southerners who have
been Democrats, we are brought face to face with a delicate situation
which we can only meet with frankness and justice. In our anxiety to
bring the Democratic Southerner into new political relations we should
have and can have no desire to pass by or ignore the comparatively few
white Southerners who from principle have consistently stood for our
views in the South when it cost them social ostracism and a loss of all
prestige. Nor can we sympathize with an effort to exclude from the
support of Republicanism in the South or to read out of the party those
colored voters who by their education and thrift have made themselves
eligible to exercise the electoral franchise.

We believe that the solution of the race question in the South is
largely a matter of industrial and thorough education. We believe that
the best friend that the Southern Negro can have is the Southern white
man, and that the growing interest which the Southern white man is
taking in the development of the Negro is one of the most encouraging
reasons for believing the problem is capable of solution. The hope of
the Southern Negro is in teaching him how to be a good farmer, how to be
a good mechanic; in teaching him how to make his home attractive and how
to live more comfortably and according to the rules of health and
morality.

Some Southerners who have given expression to their thoughts seem to
think that the only solution of the Negro question is his migration to
Africa, but to me such a proposition is utterly fatuous. The Negro is
essential to the South in order that it may have proper labor. An
attempt of Negroes to migrate from one state to another not many years
ago led to open violence at white instigation to prevent it. More than
this, the Negroes have now reached 9,000,000 in number. Their ancestors
were brought here against their will. They have no country but this.
They know no flag but ours. They wish to live under it, and are willing
to die for it. They are Americans. They are part of our people and are
entitled to our every effort to make them worthy of their
responsibilities as free men and as citizens.

The success of the experiments which have been made with them on a large
scale in giving them the benefit of thorough primary and industrial
education, justifies and requires the extension of this system as far as
possible to reach them all.

The proposition to increase the supply of labor in the South by
emigration from Europe, it seems to me, instead of being inimical to the
cause of the Negro, will aid him. As the industries of the South
continue to grow in the marvelous ratio already shown, the demand for
labor must increase. The presence of the Southern community of white
European labor from the southern part of Europe will have, I am hopeful,
the same effect that it has had upon Negro labor on the Isthmus of
Panama. It has introduced a spirit of emulation or competition, so that
to-day the tropical Negroes of the West Indies do much better work for
us in the canal construction since we brought over Spanish, Italian, and
Greek laborers.

Ultimately, of course, the burden of Negro education must fall on the
Southern people and on Southern property owners. Private charity and
munificence, except by way of furnishing an example and a model, can do
comparatively little in this direction. It may take some time to hasten
the movement for the most generous public appropriations for the
education of the Negro, but the truth that in the uplifting of the Negro
lies the welfare of the South is forcing itself on the far-sighted of
the Southern leaders. Primary and industrial education for the masses,
higher education for the leaders of the Negro race, for their
professional men, their clergymen, their physicians, their lawyers, and
their teachers, will make up a system under which their improvement,
which statistics show to have been most noteworthy in the last forty
years, will continue at the same rate.

On the whole, then, the best public opinion of the North and the best
public opinion of the South seem to be coming together in respect to all
the economic and political questions growing out of present race
conditions.

The attitude of the candidate and the platform of the Democratic Party
in the last election made this campaign a most favorable one to bring
home to the Southern people for serious consideration the query why they
should still adhere to political solidity in the South. It may be that
four years hence the candidate and platform of the Democratic Party will
more approve themselves to the South and to the intelligent men of the
South. Under these conditions there may seem to be a retrograde step,
and the South continue solid, but I venture to think that the movement
now begun will grow, slowly at first, but ultimately so as to extend
the practical political arena for the discussion of party issues into
all the Southern States.

The recent election has made it probable that I shall become more or
less responsible for the policy of the next Presidential Administration,
and I improve this opportunity to say that nothing would give me greater
pride, because nothing would give me more claim to the gratitude of my
fellow-citizens, than if I could so direct that policy in respect to the
Southern States as to convince its intelligent citizens of the desire of
the Administration to aid them in working out satisfactorily the serious
problems before them and of bringing them and their Northern
fellow-citizens closer and closer in sympathy and point of view. During
the last decade, in common with all lovers of our country, I have
watched with delight and thanksgiving the bond of union between the two
sections grow firmer. I pray that it may be given to me to strengthen
this movement, to obliterate all sectional lines, and leave nothing of
difference between the North and the South, save a friendly emulation
for the benefit of our common country.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The South and the National Government, by 
William Howard Taft

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOUTH ***

***** This file should be named 19812.txt or 19812.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/8/1/19812/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
