The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rogers-isms, the Cowboy Philosopher on the
Peace Conference, by Will Rogers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rogers-isms, the Cowboy Philosopher on the Peace Conference

Author: Will Rogers

Release Date: February 11, 2007 [EBook #20566]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROGERS-ISMS, THE COWBOY ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Irma Å pehar and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)





ROGERS-ISMS

The Cowboy Philosopher on _The Peace Conference_

By WILL ROGERS

[Illustration]

Frontispiece Portrait

[Illustration]

_NEW YORK_: HARPER & BROTHERS: _PUBLISHERS_




ROGERS-ISMS:
THE COWBOY PHILOSOPHER ON THE PEACE CONFERENCE

Copyright, 1919, by Harper & Brothers
Printed in the United States of America
Published May, 1919




The Cowboy Philosopher on _The Peace Conference_



_In the Five times I have appeared before President Wilson I
have used dozens of these same jokes, about him, And he has
the best sense of humor and is the best audience I ever
played too, Which bears out the theory I work on, That you
can always joke about a big Man that is really big, But dont
ever kid about the little fellow that thinks he is
something, cause he will get sore Thats why hes little,_

W. R.




ALIBI


There is no particular reason why I should horn in on you
Public with a Book, But thats just when they seem to write
them, When theres no need or reason for them,

_The shorter white Paper gets the more careless these Pen
Hounds get with it,_

All my friends advise me to go ahead Will and write it cause
you wont annoy people with it like these other Writers do
with theirs, Nobody will read yours

When a Guy has never grazed educationally any further than
McGuffeys fourth Reader his ravings aint liable to throw
any jealous scare into Literary Circles,

_Grammar and I get along like a Russian and a BathTub,_

In fact Americans are getting to dote too much on Grammar
and Good Manners, They say the most perfect English in this
country is spoken in Sing Sing, And at the Federal Prison in
Atlanta, They claim a Knife never touched a Lip, So you see
where that junk leads you too,

I was going to write a Book on the War, But I heard some
fellow had already done it,

In fact I figure that the fellow who dont write on the war
will be a novelty, There is so many Books on the War that
no two people will have to read the same Book.

Then the War was too serious a subject I could not write on
it, But the Peace Feast, That seemed to offer a better field
for Humor provided you stick to the _facts_,

_I have some inside facts procured from the most reliable
source_, And as I dont want to see the World grow up in
ignorance on this historical subject I would really feel
selfish and mean too withold it,

Heres how I got it, There is a fellow I know, Who had a
friend, And this friends Sister had a sweetheart and he was
a Soldier in France and his cousins pal was a Bunkie of Col
Houses Chouffer, The Col told his Chouffer So you see my
information comes from the same place Pres Wilsons does,

_So Here Goes Under The Bottom With_ THE FIRST PEACE BOOK,




THE PEACE CONFERENCE


Of course this whole Peace Conference talk started from the
time Pres Wilson said to Germany "We wont deal with you as
long as you occupy invaded Territory." Well the Kaiser come
right back at him and said, "If you can show us how we can
give it up any faster than we are I wish you would do it,"

Now the Armistace was signed, and Germany agreed to quit
running at eleven oclock on a certain day,

Of course we got the word a couple of days before it was
really signed, Making everybody have TWO DRUNKS where one
would have done just as well,

It would have been signed on this first day But the German
Generals whom they sent out to sign up, had never been to
the front and dident know just where it was,

The Kaiser was on the verge at one time of visiting the
western front then he said, "No I will just wait a few days
till it comes to me,"

Our Show was playing in Philadelphia when the first
Armistace was signed, (_The one the saloon men framed up_) I
was a bit leary of it all the time as I had been there once
before when the Union League Club had paraded for a Mr
Hughes, Then later they had to put the Parade back,

I HAD ALWAYS BELIEVED PHILA TO BE SLOW AND HERE IT WAS 2
DAYS AHEAD OF THE FACTS

At that time everybody wondered what to do with the Kaiser,
I thought he should have been brought to this Country and
made to clean the streets after that first Armistace day,

A funny thing the Armistace was signed about the time the
returns of the last election come in. The Germans and the
Democrats learned their fate on the same day,

When the war was over the Kaiser called his 6 sons to him
and said, "Now boys we better duck Cause this war is over
and you boys can get hurt _Now_,"

The thing that hurt the Kaiser worse than losing the war,
Was that in all the Armistace terms they dident even mention
his name,

Everybody commence talking about the Peace Conference and
who was to go, Some Republican Senators went so far as to
engage a lower birth,

_There was so much argument about who was to go, That Pres
Wilson says I tell you what, "We will split 50-50 I will go
and you fellows can stay,"_

At last we were going to get even with them for all their
commissions coming over here,

You know for a while COMMISSIONS were coming so fast, That
we were lucky to find a fellow who knew what Flag to put
out each day,

We were meeting Servian Commissions with Romanian Flags,

Of course there were nations coming at that time who had not
enough to support a flag, Thats why the commission were here
to place a Flag Contract,

Now to get to my Peace trip, About three months are supposed
to have elapsed between the last Paragraph and this one, All
of which time was taken up by Congress talking, (_see
congressional Record_) Finally Pres Wilson got tired
listening to them and walked out on them,

If it had not been to get away from Congress, I have my
doubts if he would have gone to Europe,

_Now for the Number 2 Peace trip,_

This Peace trip is not an original Idea, (It was originated
by some obscure MANAFACTURER OF KNICK NACKS,) _Name
furnished at advertising rates_,

Its always the same, the fellow who originates anything or
starts something new is generally called a nut, The next
fellow comes along takes his Idea improves on it and of
course is a smart man,

Of Course this No 2 Company used better Judgement than the
first one. This one waited till the war was over to Go,

This is the only case in Theatrical History where the No 2
Company was better than the original,

Of corse I claim this Manafacturer in some middle west town
(I cant seem to recall that fellows name) made one mistake,
There were people on his Boat that should never have had a
return trip ticket,

Through Holland receiving them is where the Kaiser got his
idea of going there,

Of course there was a lot of dissatisfaction against the
Pres going, Mostly by people whom he did not take along,

I was in favor of his going because I thought it would give
us a chance to find out who was Vice President, But it
Dident,

I also felt confident that he was the only man that could
explain the 14 points

We were especially lucky in having him represent us in
England as he is the only one we could have sent that spoke
good enough english that they could understand,

He would have taken a Senator but couldent find one that had
a dress Suit

A congressman of course was out of the question He couldent
have eaten off a 15 million dollar plate He would have
starved to death looking at it,

For awhile it looked like Mr Hughes would get to go, While
the others were signing up he could have been investigating,
his report would have been ready the day before the next
election,

Also asked a manafacturer from some lake town (I cant think
of that Birds name) But he said "No thank you one trip
cured me"

The Sectry of Agriculture was named to go for a while, It
was thought that if we were fortunate enough to be assigned
any loose Islands at the meeting He could immediately advise
what to plant thereby getting in a crop next year,

_MR ROOT_ was named then some one happened to think of
RUSSIA and that was off,

_Wanted_ BRYAN _to go but nobody knew where he was,_

I wanted to go along as _JESTER_ Pres Wilson will miss his
comedy when he gets away from Congress,

I wanted to represent the United Press (the one that sent in
that prematur peace report) I could have had them there
before they started,

See they took one Republican with them, But I have never
read any thing in the papers about him landing, Just about
chucked that guy overboard,

=Took a republican along to argue with on the way over,=

=They will about make him Wait on the Peace Table,=

See where Admiral Dr Grayson stood his Maiden voyage well,

Mr Creel went along to suppress any SCANDAL that may crop
up

On arriving they found they had forgotten something after
searching they found it was the _Industrial Committee_,

Now Mr Barney Baruch is going in case we land a few Shekels,
why Barney will count up for us,

_Also Mr Garfield "said he wasent going to stay in this
Country and FREEZE another winter,"_

If they keep on sending for them, Talk about getting the
boys back, it will take a couple of years to get all these
Peace Guys back,

We may not have had as many Nations in the war as these
other Nations but we are going to Swamp them at the Peace
Table,

Col House was there to meet the Boat in a _listening
Capacity_,

Lot of men have _fought_ their way into fame and _talked_
their way into fame but Col House is the only man that ever
just LISTENED HIMSELF IN,

After looking over Paris the troop went to London, Can you
imagine how sore these Republicans got when they read about
a Democrat sleeping in Buckingham Palace,

Kaiser and Czar used to kid King George and tell him he
dident have any power He can get back at them now and say
"No I havent got much power but I am still _Kinging_ aint
I,"

Pres left London passed through Paris got an earfull from
Col House and played a week of one Night stands through
Italy,

He had a letter of recomendation from Caruso so he met some
of the best people in Italy,

Every time the Pres wanted applause in his speeches in Italy
he would mention GARIBALDI which sounds same in English as
Italian,

Belgium wanted to book him there but the Pres got wise that
they were holding so many Banquets they were trying to wear
him out before the Peace Feast started,

King of Italy also the King of England have agreed with him
up to now But unfortunately they neither one will be at the
Peace signing,

England is orally in accord but there has been nothing
signed,

They are a little late starting as they were waiting to find
someone who knew what freedom of the Seas mean,

NOW IF HE CAN ONLY HANDLE THAT MEETING AS HE DOES CONGRESS
WE NEED HAVE NO FEAR OF THE RESULT,

You know a lot of people think he is liable to be too easy
with them dont you believe it he can be pretty stern when he
wants to remember last fall when he sent Germany their
Questionaire, Said GIVE ME YOUR REAL NAME AND PERMANENT
ADDRESS,

Lets hope the Turkish Deligation dont bring all their WIVES
or we never will get _PEACE_,

And lets make those Russians shave before they sign up we
want to know who we are dealing with,

If Ireland sends a deligation I can hear France say bring us
back war,

Now the Pres says we are going to recognize the CZECHO
SLOVAKS we may recognize them but we will never pronounce
them,

That Nation has caused Readers more trouble than any other
one in war,

They cant make the Peace terms much worse than those
Armistace terms for they read like a 2nd mortgage, Party of
the second part has no more chance than a Democrat in the
next Congress,

We are handicapped at this meeting, England and France both
have their Prime Ministers there while _BILLY SUNDAY_ dident
go for us,

Each Nation is supposed to share in the Peace terms
according to what they have done in the war, Holland gets
the KAISER, Mexico the CROWN PRINCE,

Now the Pres has to get back here before Mar 1st when the
Country goes in into the hands of the Republicans or they
are liable to want to charge him a tarriff to get in again,

OF COURSE WE DONT RECEIVE MUCH NEWS OF THE PEACE CONFERENCE.
FIRST FEW WEEKS THEY ARE ALL JUST COMPLIMENTING EACH OTHER.
WAIT TILL THEY GO TO DIVIDE UP SOMETHING. (What a truth
that turned out to be)

Well by this time Congress was getting pretty rough so Pres
W grabbed his boat and commuted back home,

Said I think I will land in BOSTON the old Pilgrim Fathers
had pretty fair luck, and _nobody has ever landed there
since_,

Germany couldent figure out how America could get troops
over there and get them trained so quick they dident know
that in our manual there is nothing about RETREATING and
when you only got to teach an Army to go one way you can do
it in half the time,

I feel pretty proud over that last little gag, As I used it
before Pres Wilson in Washington and he repeated it in his
Boston speech, Saying "as one of our AMERICAN HUMORISTS
says," Up to then I had only been an ordinary Rope thrower,

_Pretty tough when the Pres cops your act,_

Pres had pretty good luck on that 1st trip they saw his 14
points and raised him -------- ---- more

Says in there, "There is to be no more wars" and then there
was a Paragraph a little further down told you where to get
your AMMUNITION in case there was one,

Now he come's back to Washington to explain the _LEAGUE OF
NATIONS_ to Congress You know those guys cant read anything
and understand it,

But after eating out of 15 million dollar Gold Plates and
hobnobbing with Kings and Dukes can you imagine how Congress
looked to him when he come back,

Had All the Senators up to dinner at White House Took Ham
Lewis three days to dress for it,

_Not much news from the Dinner Burleson copped the Phones,_

On last day went up to Capitol to sign all the bills
Congress had passed Well after he had signed the _bill_,

Then he went before Congress and balled out the WILFUL 37,
he was busier than Mcadoo with a new train,

HE and Taft both spoke on same stage first time Pres and
x-pres ever _agreed_,

I still wanted to go along but he said: "wait Will till some
other trip and I will take you,"

You know _13_ is his lucky number if they dont sign this up
on this trip he knows they will on his 13th trip,

You see Congress got sore cause he did not call them in
extra session, You know the next Con, is _Republican_, Be a
good joke on them if he dident call them at all wouldent it,

Back to Paris to meet Col House the only man the Pres ever
listened too,

MR DANIELS went over. First time they have ever taken
Josephus anywhere, He will be allright in a crowd,

Made Mr Hoover food DICTATOR for all the Allies That means
that _BELG FRANCE_ and _ENG_, are not going to get any
_more_ to eat than we do,

Conference at 1st gave America Japan Italy France 5
deligates each and England including her Colonies fourteen,
Thats all right to allow England for each one of her
_Foreign Relations_, But they did not allow us a single one
for _Wisconsin_,

_How would you like to have been on a committee of_
Englishman _to inform Ireland they dident get any
Deligates_, OH BOY,

Finally got it down to the big TEN now theres only FOUR,
speaking to each other,

America dident know till they got over there that those
European Nations have had a disease for years called the
Gimmes.

England and Japan had a secret Treaty where England was to
get everything south of the equator and Japan everything
North, Guess they were going to leave the equator for
Ireland,

Japan wanted it put in the contract that she was as good as
anybody else If she _admitted_ it why put it in, If a man is
a Gentleman he don't have a _sign_ on him telling it,

Tell Japan we will recognize them as soon as they recognize
China,

=Peace Table is turning out like all Banquets the speeches
are too long,=

Everybody at the Table wants a second helping, And Germany
the cook hasent got enough to go around,

They agreed on one of the 14 points that was that America
went in for _nothing_ and _expects nothing_ they are all
UNANIMOUS WE GET IT,

Wanted to put the LEAGUE of nations in with Peace Treaty,
thats like a fellow going into a store and the Merchant wont
sell him a Suit unless he uses a Gillette Razor,

Its been a great thing for these Senators if it had not been
for this to _knock_ they would not have gotten all these
Lecture Dates,

The way a lot Of Senators talk you would think Pres W was
going to trade America off for a couple of Golf Clubs,

They seem to think the Pres took the =Monroe Doctrine= in his
pocket and is liable to lose it over there,

Pres Wilson threatened he would start the war over again, Be
terrible if they found out this war was fixed and they had
to fight it over again,

They cant let the Russians in this league or they would make
a Bush League out of it,

_Best time to have formed this League of Nations was during
the war when all these Nations needed each other,_

Everybody is for something to prevent war, but they are
afraid it is like Prohibition it dont prohibit,

League of Nations just as clear as the Income Tax blanks,

One thing we got to be thankful for our Soldiers can win
wars faster than our Diplomats can talk us into them,

Pres Wilson finally got discouraged at the stalling and told
them that if they dident hurry up and do something the
Americans would pick up their Wives and come home,

Pres says "JAMES BRING MY BOAT"

They then got busy and decided that Belgium could try the
Kaiser, Belgium said "how do we get him," Allies said "thats
it if we could get him we would try him ourselves,"

Some Nations got so tired waiting for Peace they went back
to fighting again,

Been working on this League of Nations all winter, Finally
one of the deligates said "What about Peace with Germany"
The others all said "thats right we never thought of that,"

Went to call in Germany and they said "Why we had give you
all up thought you wasent coming, We got a better offer
from the Bolsheveki"

=They offer us no indemnities and no Baths,=

If they ever have another war lets have it understood before
they start what each Nation wants at the finish,

All those Nations claim they were fighting for freedom, But
of course a little more land would make a little more
Freedom,

One thing about this League, The last war there were only 10
or 15 nations in it now if they all sign this they can all
be in the next one, It wont be near so exclusive,

_Course its hard to please everybody Taft tried that,_

If Pres Wilson had any doubts about this League of Nations
being put through he should have taken some of these
Prohibitionist. They would have shown him how to get it
through whether people wanted it or not,

France says they would have more confidence in this League
if they would slip a couple of Nations in between them and
Germany,

I WONDER IF WE QUIT FIGHTING TOO QUICK AND DIDENT SIGN PEACE
QUICK ENOUGH,

Dont get impatient. It has been just this hard at the end of
every war to try and prevent another one,

Pres on his last voyage home said the Monroe Doctrine was
fully protected already And to show them that it was, He has
now put it in,

This Monroe thing the Republicans talk so much of and know
so little about, Protects us against everything but VILLA.

And in the whole History of America he is the only _Nation_
that ever attacked us,

Italy says they will pick up their Marbles and go home

Pres Wilson says you may Fiume, But you will never get it,

Today is Japans day to threaten to pack their kimonas and
leave,

Italy bases her claim on an old treaty, She cant afford to
trace her Treatys back too far, _If I remember she
originally was signed up with Germany_,

Pres Wilson certainly used good judgement in visiting Italy
when he first went over,

Sectry BAKER has gone back over to France again think old
Newt, kinder likes PARIS,

_They wanted Mcadoo to go but the salary wasent right,_

Can you imagine a guy that couldent make a living out of all
the jobs he held, I would love to have just half what one
Republican would have made out of all that,

Lot of Reps dont want this League Gag to pass they are
jealous cause the Democrats ran the last war, And they want
to have another one to show how much better they could run
one than the Democrats,

Even the Big 4 seem to be losing confidence, They have
removed the words High Contracting Parties, which appeared
418 times in the original and now speak of it meekly as
members of the League,

We know Pres Wilson had a lot to do with drafting it, Cause
it has so many WORDS

Now it will take longer to explain it than it did to write
it,

If Mr Lodge and Mr Lowell debate on these new amendments
Boston has applied for a change of Venue,

_Only debate ever held where both men agreed,_

Pres is up to his old tricks has sent a NOTE to Italy,

His appeal to the Italian People caused as much of a furore
as the one to the voters last fall,

Italy says they know Fiume was not in their secret treaty
with other Allies But its a nice town and they hate to see
it fall into bad hands,

Get all those Nations sore enough to start telling the truth
about each other, We will hear something,

Italy claims Fiume because there is more Italians there than
anybody else, according to that Look whod get NEW YORK

Japans claims are sorter novel "They want pay for capturing
part of China one of our own Allies"

They have offered to protect Siberia if they have to stay
there forever to do it,

If Japan gets all her claims China will pay more indemnities
than Germany who lost the war,

Imagine Japan, Pres Wilson, and Italy, All talking at once,
Good thing they cant understand each other or this
Conference would never have lasted this long,

AND THEY CALL THAT A PEACE CONFERENCE,

Guess those CZECHO POLOKS have gotten their freedom, I see
where they are at _war_.

Wish I could find a man who had read this LEAGUE OF NATIONS,
And could tell which was the _Assembly_ and which was the
_Council_,

Thats a good clause in there "where any Allied Nation must
give three months notice before it jumps onto any other
Allied Nation,"

_Now the Women want to send Deligates, They forget this is
a_ Peace Conference,

See where the German Deligates to the Peace Table brought
their Golf Clubs We can see now how Admiral Graysons Pupil
stacks up against opposition,

See where Pres Wilson and Italy have compromised on that
town down there _Italy got it_,

Its kinder new wrinkle in Diplomacy, The Slovaks can play
with it four years till they begin to like it, And then they
take it away from them,

AS I UNDERSTAND IT ITALY IS TO HAVE IT TUESDAYS AND
SATURDAYS,

But they are going to build those other People (_with that
terrible name_) A little young town just as much like this
one as they can, down the river aways

Guess the reason they put a four year limit on it, Was that
they figured that would about cover the existence of any of
those new Nations,

The Idea over there now seems to be lets get something ready
to sign up, Whether its any good or not,

See where Pres Wilson and Japan _compromised_ on that CHOW
CHOW PLACE JAPAN GETS IT,

I dont know how much money Indemnity Japan will demand from
China,

_You know_ CHINA _has one of the best_ JAPANESE _Armies in
the World_,

See where Pres Wilson and England compromised on Freedom of
the Seas England got it,

Italy left the Conference and got what she wanted, Japan
threatened to leave and got what she wanted, If Pres Wilson
had left some Republican Senators would have gotten what
they wanted,

_Seems several Nations were like_ Jesse Willard _they wanted
to know what they were to get before they entered the
Arena_,

Well they finally handed Germany the Peace terms 80 thousand
words only thing ever written longer than a Lafollette
Speech,

HAD TO BE THAT LONG TO TELL THE GERMANS WHAT THEY THOUGHT OF
THEM

Imagine what a document for Lawers to pick flaws in,

Could have settled the whole thing in one sentence, "IF YOU
BIRDS START ANYTHING AGAIN WE WILL GIVE YOU THE OTHER
BARREL,"

RUSSIA cant get in on this Peace There is not enough Paper
in the World to print 80 thousand Russian words on,

If they want to get even with Germany they ought to let them
keep their Cables And appoint Burleson to run them

_I thought the Armistace terms read like a second Mortgage,
But this reads like a_ FORECLOSURE,

If Germany ever wants to go to war again she will have to
fight with _BEER STEINS_

If Germany stops to read those 80 thousand words before they
sign them, We needent expect Peace to be signed for years
yet,

Now Folks with all this kidding and foolishness aside, for I
just say in here whatever I think anybody might laugh at,
But of course my real sentiments are the same as everybody
else, anything to prevent war If He puts this thing through
and there is no more wars, His address will be WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON D C till his whiskers are as long as the Peace
Treaty If it should be a Fliv, (which it wont) Why then a
letter would reach him at ALABI NEW JERSEY. So all Credit to
Pres Wilson it took some game Guy to go through with it,

THE END




Transcriber's Note

The spelling, punctuation and formatting in this project
greatly varies. Everything has been kept as it appears in
the original images.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rogers-isms, the Cowboy Philosopher on
the Peace Conference, by Will Rogers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROGERS-ISMS, THE COWBOY ***

***** This file should be named 20566.txt or 20566.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/5/6/20566/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Irma Å pehar and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
