The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great God Gold, by William Le Queux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great God Gold

Author: William Le Queux

Release Date: October 27, 2012 [EBook #41199]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT GOD GOLD ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Great God Gold
By William Le Queux
Published by Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press, Boston, USA.
This edition dated 1910.

The Great God Gold, by William Le Queux.

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE GREAT GOD GOLD, BY WILLIAM LE QUEUX.

PREFACE.

AN EXPLANATION.

The remarkable secret revealed in the following pages is not purely
fiction.

The discovery, much in the form that I have here presented it, has
actually been made, and its discoverer, a well-known professor at one of
the Universities in the North of Europe, recently placed the
extraordinary statement in my hands.

In consequence, I consulted a number of the first living authorities on
the subject, who most courteously gave me their opinions and to whom I
owe much assistance, while several other Hebrew scholars, less noted,
evinced the greatest curiosity.

Therefore I trust that the reader himself may find this hitherto
unheard-of statement of facts of equal importance and interest.

William Le Queux.

Devonshire Club, London, 1910.

CHAPTER ONE.

INTRODUCES THE STRANGER.

"My name?  Why--what does that matter, Doctor?  In an hour--perhaps
before--I won't trouble anybody further."

"But surely it is your duty, my friend, to let me know your name?"
argued the other.  "Even if it be in confidence."

The dying man slowly shook his head in the negative, moved uneasily, and
stretching forth his thin trembling hand, answered in indifferent
French.

"I regret that I cannot satisfy your curiosity.  I have a reason--a--a
strong private reason.  Here is my key," he went on, speaking very
slowly and with great difficulty in a weak voice scarce above a whisper.
"Open my bag, doctor, and;--and you'll find there a--a big envelope.
Will you give it to me?"

The Doctor, a queer, deformed little man shabbily dressed, with grey
hair and short grey beard, rose from the bedside and with the key
crossed to where a well-worn leather bag lay upon the floor.

As he turned his back upon his nameless patient and knelt beside the
bag, a curious look of craft and cunning overspread his hard, furrowed
countenance.  But it was only for a second.  Next instant it had
vanished, and given place to that serious expression of sympathy which
his face had previously worn.

He found a large blue, linen-lined envelope which he gave into the white
trembling hands of the stranger.

The prostrate man looked about fifty, his unkempt hair and moustache
just tinged with grey, unshaved, and with white drawn face betraying
long and intense suffering.

Why was he so determined to conceal his name?  What secret of his life
had he to hide?

Upon his blanched features was written the history of a curious and
adventurous past.  Perhaps he held some strange and amazing secret.  He
was eccentric in only one particular--that though he knew himself to be
dying, he would leave no message for any relative; refusing absolutely
and stubbornly to give his name, even to the man who, now at his side,
had befriended him.

The room was a small and not over cleanly one, high up in a fourth-rate
hotel close to the Gare du Nord, in Paris, a room with a single bed, a
threadbare carpet, and a cheap wooden washstand with the grey December
light filtering through lace curtains that hung limp and yellow.  The
wallpaper was greasy and faded, and the bed itself the reverse of
inviting.

To Doctor Raymond Diamond the dying man had been an entire stranger
until three days before--a chance acquaintance which adversity had
brought him.  Both men were, as a matter of fact, stranded in Paris.
They had, in ascending the narrow stairs of their little hotel, wished
each other "Good-day."  Men who are hard up always form easy
acquaintanceships.  The stranger had told him that he was a Dane, from
Copenhagen, but the name, Jules Blanc, which he had given to the
proprietor was certainly not Danish.  Indeed, he had admitted to Diamond
that he had not given his real name.  He had reasons for withholding it.

He was a mystery, and the Doctor strongly suspected him of having
absconded from his native land, and coming to the end of his resources,
was now in fear of the police.

That he was well educated had been quickly apparent.  Though he spoke
French badly it was evident that he had nevertheless travelled
extensively, and had, in his better days, been possessed of considerable
means.  He had been in the Near East, Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine and
Egypt, and appeared to possess an intimate knowledge of those countries.

Yet his luggage had been reduced to that one small bag containing a big
blue envelope and a chancre of linen.

For two days they had idled about Paris together, both practically
without a _sou_.

The Doctor, when he had discovered the true state of his friend's
finances, had explained that he too was "temporarily embarrassed owing
to his many recent investments;" whereat they had both laughed in chorus
and with light hearts spent half the day lazily lolling upon the seats
in the Tuileries Gardens watching the children at play.

It was during those idle hungry hours that the stranger's remarks
aroused within the Doctor the greatest curiosity.  Diamond himself, an
Englishman, had in his student days taken his M.D. at Edinburgh, and was
also a scholar of no mean attainments, yet this Dane's knowledge of many
occult matters appeared amazingly profound.

Why did he so resolutely refuse to give his name?

On the day the Doctor had met the Dane, his financial resources
consisted of one solitary franc and a twenty-five centime nickel piece.
His newly found friend had less.  Hence the food they had had was not
very abundant.  The two men, however, brothers in adversity, faced the
hunger problem gaily.  It was not the first time that either of them had
been face to face with the streets and starvation, therefore it was no
new experience.

Yet the stranger ever and anon seemed deeply depressed.  He knit his
brows, set his teeth hard, and drew deep sighs--sighs over the
might-have-beens of his past.  His business in Paris was an important,
an entirely secret one, he had declared.  In a few days--in a week at
most--it must be completed.

"And then," he added with a laugh of confidence, "I shall probably move
on to the Grand."

That same evening, however, as they were walking up the Rue Lafayette
towards the obscure hotel, the stranger had been suddenly seized with
sharp pains in the region of his heart.  Neither man had tasted food for
twenty-four hours, and both were cold and faint.

Diamond, however, took the man's arm and managed to get him back to his
room.  There he examined him carefully, and having diagnosed the case,
recognised the extreme danger, but told the patient nothing decisive.

He saw the proprietor, and from him borrowed three francs.  Then he
wrote a prescription which he took round to the big Pharmacie du Nord,
at the corner.

The mixture revived the invalid, but in the night he collapsed again.
At mid-day Diamond obtained a cup of bouillon from a cheap restaurant
near, and brought it to the man who had refused his name.  And he had
now sat by the bedside with his fingers upon the patient's pulse all
through that short gloomy afternoon.

"I'm sorry things are so bad as they are," the Doctor was saying, as he
handed the invalid the big blue envelope, for he had, an hour before,
told him the truth.  "You ought to have had advice long ago."

The dying man smiled faintly and shook his head.

"I was warned in Stockholm," he answered in a low tone.  "But I didn't
heed.  I--I was a fool."

The Doctor sighed.  What could he say?  He had recognised that the poor
fellow was already beyond human aid.  He had probably been suffering
from the affection of the heart for the past six or seven years--perhaps
more.

"And you are certain?" asked the ugly little man at last, again taking
the thin, bony hand in his.  "Are you quite certain that you wish to
send no message to anybody?"

For a few seconds the prostrate man struggled hard to speak.

"No," he succeeded in gasping at last.  "No message--to--anybody."

The Doctor pursed his lips at the rebuff.  The eccentricity of the
stranger had become more marked in those moments of finality.

His thin, nerveless fingers were fumbling with the bulky envelope, which
seemed to contain a quantity of folded papers.

"Doctor," he whispered at last, "I--I want to burn--all these--all--
every one of them.  Burn them entirely."

"As you wish, my dear friend," responded the hunchback, eyeing the
envelope eagerly, and wondering what it might contain.  "I'll put a
match to them in the stove yonder."

The invalid, by dint of great effort, managed to move himself so that
his eyes could fall upon the little door in the round iron stove, in
which, however, no fire was burning, even though the day was bitterly
cold.

Yet he hesitated, hesitated as though he dared not trust the hungry
little man who had befriended him.

"Do you wish them destroyed?" the Doctor again inquired.

The dying man nodded, at the same moment raising his finger and
motioning that he could not speak.

Diamond waited.  He saw that the patient was vainly endeavouring to
articulate some words.

For several moments there was a dead silence.

At last the nameless man spoke again, very softly and indistinctly.
Indeed, the Doctor was compelled to bend low to catch the words:

"Take them," he said.  "Take them--and burn them in the stove.  Mind--
destroy every one."

"Certainly I will," answered the other.  "Give them to me, and you shall
see me burn them.  I'll do so there--before your eyes."

The man held the envelope in his dying grip.  He still hesitated.  His
eyes were fixed upon the papers wistfully, as though filled with
poignant regret at a mission unaccomplished.

"Ah!" he gasped with difficulty.  "To think that this is the end--the
end of a lifetime's study and struggle!  Death defeats me, vanquishes
me--as it has vanquished every other man who has striven to learn the
secret."

Diamond stood listening in wonder and curiosity.  He noticed the dying
man's reluctance to destroy the papers.

Perhaps he would succumb, and leave them undestroyed!  What secret could
they contain?

There was a long silence.  The grey light over the thousands of
chimney-pots was fast fading into gloom.  The room was darkening.

The patient lay motionless as one dead, yet his dull eyes were still
open.  In his hand he still held his treasured envelope.

Again Diamond spoke, but the man with a secret made no reply.  He only
raised his wan hand, and shook his head sadly, indicating inability to
speak.

The queer little Doctor bent once more closer to the stranger and saw
that the end was near.  He was hoping against hope that the man would
expire before he had strength to order the destruction of those
documents, whatever they were.  The mysterious statements of the dying
man had indicated that the papers in question contained some remarkable
secret, and naturally his curiosity had been aroused.

During those three brief days of their acquaintance he had, in vain,
tried to form some conclusion as to who the stranger might be.  At first
he had believed him to be a broken-down medical man like himself.  But
that surmise had been quickly negatived.  He was a professional man
without a doubt, but he had carefully concealed even his profession as
well as his name.

The doctor had re-seated himself in the rickety rush-bottomed chair at
the bedside, and sat in patience for the end, as he had sat beside
hundreds of other dying men and women in the course of his career.

The patient breathed heavily, and again stirring uneasily, cast a
longing look at the glass of lemonade upon the little table near by.
Diamond recognised his wish, and held the tumbler to the man's parched
lips.

The dying stranger motioned, and the Doctor bent his head until his ear
was near the other's mouth.

"Doctor," he managed to whisper after great difficulty, "it's no use.
There's no hope!  Therefore will you take them to the stove--and--and
burn them--_burn them all_!"

"Certainly I will," was the Doctor's reply, rising and slowly taking the
envelope from the prostrate man's reluctant fingers.

He felt crisp papers within as he turned his back upon the dying man and
bent down to the stove, placing himself between the invalid's line of
vision and the stove itself.

A moment later, however, he opened the stove-door, placed the envelope
within, and applied a match to it.

Next moment a blood-red light fell across the darkening room upon the
pallid face lying on the pillow.

A pair of dull, anxious, deep-set eyes watched the flames leap up and
quickly die down again, watched the crinkling tinder as the sparks died
out one by one--watched until Diamond stirred up the charred folios in
order that every one should be consumed.

Then he turned slightly in his bed and, stretching forth his hand as
though wishing to speak, drew a long, hard breath.

"And--and so--vanishes all my hope--my life," the stranger managed to
sob bitterly in a voice almost inaudible.

Again he sighed--a long-drawn sigh.  And then--in the room, now almost
dark, reigned a complete silence.

Death had entered there.  The man with the secret had passed to that
land which lies beyond human ken.

CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES THE DOCTOR'S DOINGS.

Raymond Diamond's unfortunate deformity had always been against his
advancement in his profession.

The only son of old Doctor Diamond, a country practitioner of the old
school, in Norfolk, he had had a brilliant career at Edinburgh, and
after some years of changeful life as a _locum tenens_ had bought a
partnership in a practice on the outskirts of Birmingham.

His partner turned out to be a rogue who had misrepresented facts, and
six months afterwards absconded to America.  Diamond, however, betrayed
a sharp resourcefulness.  He advertised the practice in the _Lancet_,
and when a prospective purchaser came to view it, he hired fourteen or
fifteen men to come into the surgery, one after the other, and pay fees.
Such an impression did this ruse cause upon the newly married medico,
who came from London to investigate, that he bought it at once, and
Diamond netted nearly twice the sum he originally gave for his
partnership.

Finding that his deformity precluded him from forming anything like a
lucrative practice, he accepted a berth as ship's doctor in the P&O
service, and for some years sailed the Indian and China seas.

Back in London again, he drifted from one suburban practice to another,
doing _locum_ work, and at last built up a semblance of a practice in a
cheap new suburban district down at Catford.

Even there, however, his ugliness proved much against him, and at last
he was forced to retire into a Northamptonshire village, where he and
his wife eked out a modest living by adopting children upon yearly
payments.

It was not a very creditable means of livelihood, yet the several
children beneath their cottage roof were all well treated and well cared
for.  And after all, Raymond Diamond, a brilliant man in many ways, was
only a failure because of his physical shortcomings.

He knew his Paris well.  In his younger days he had often been there.
Indeed, he once resided at St Cloud with an invalid gentleman for close
upon two years.  Long years of travel had rendered him a thorough-going
cosmopolitan, even though his lot was now cast in a sleepy country
village.

The reason of his present visit to Paris was in order to interview the
father of one of his adopted daughters, but the man had not kept the
appointment, and by waiting from day to day in hope of finding him, he
had exhausted his slender finances, and he knew that his patient wife
was in a similar condition of penury at home.

He was certainly a strikingly ugly man.  His forehead was broad and
bulgy, and his face narrowed to the point of the beard.  His head seemed
too large, his arms too long and ungainly, while his face was deeply
furrowed by long years at sea.  His mouth, too, was wide and ugly and
when he laughed he displayed an uneven row of teeth much discoloured by
tobacco.

With folded arms, he was standing by the dead stranger, silently
contemplating the white upturned face which showed distinctly in the
fading twilight.

"I wonder who he was?" he exclaimed aloud.  "Why did he refuse his name,
and why was he so particular to burn those papers?  He was a queer
stick--poor fellow!  I suppose they have inquests in France, and I'll
get something as a witness."

And he pulled the sheet tenderly across to hide the lifeless visage.

"But," he added, "perhaps I've rendered myself liable because I didn't
call in a French doctor!"

Then, suddenly arousing himself, he walked softly across to the stove
and, spreading his handkerchief on the floor, raked out all the tinder
into it.  To his satisfaction he saw, as he had anticipated, that some
of the papers, closely folded as they were, had only been burned at the
edges.

One of them he opened, and found it covered with typewriting.

"These will, no doubt, prove interesting," he remarked to himself as he
gathered every particle up into the handkerchief, and very carefully
folded it over to protect it.

The lid of an old cardboard box which he found under the bed he broke
up, and placing one piece above the handkerchief and the other below, he
put the whole into the breast-pocket of his shabby frock-coat.

The stranger's bag he next examined.  It was old, and covered with
labels of first-class hotels--many of them in cities in the Near East
and the Levant.  The contents were disappointing, only a couple of
shirts marked with the initials "P.H.", several dirty collars, a cravat
or two, and a safety razor, together with a few unimportant odds and
ends.

"The proprietor must have these, in lieu of his bill, I suppose,"
Diamond said.  "I wonder what `P.H.' stands for?  He was a well-read man
without a doubt.  By Jove! he took his blow as bravely as any fellow
I've seen go under.  With a heart like that, it's a marvel that he lived
so long.  If I knew who his relatives were, I'd `wire' to them--
providing I had the money," he added with a bitter smile.

Then he shrugged his shoulders, and after striking a match to reassure
himself that nothing had been left inside the stove to betray the fact
that papers had been burned there, he turned upon his heel and left the
room.

Below, in his dingy little back room on the first floor, he saw the
proprietor, and told him what had occurred.

The old man grunted in his armchair and ordered the greasy-looking
_valet-de-chambre_ to inform the police, but to first go and search the
dead man's effects and ascertain if he had left any money.

"Monsieur Blanc was penniless, like myself," Diamond said.  "Neither of
us had eaten all day yesterday."

"No money to pay his bill!" croaked the old Frenchman, who looked more
like a _concierge_ than a hotel proprietor.  "And you are also without
money?" he asked glaring.

"I regret that such is the truth," was Diamond's answer with much
politeness.  "Has not m'sieur noticed in life that honest men are mostly
poor?  Thieves and rogues are usually in funds."

"Then I must ask you to leave my hotel at once," said the old man
testily.

The Doctor grinned, and bowed.

"If that is m'sieur's decision, I can do nothing else but obey," was his
polite answer.

"You will leave your luggage, of course."

"M'sieur is quite welcome to all he finds," was the Doctor's response,
and with another bow he turned and strode out.

His plan had worked admirably.  He had no desire to remain there in the
present circumstances.  To be ordered out was certainly better than to
flee.

So he walked gaily down the stairs, and a few minutes later was
strolling airily down the Rue Lafayette, in the direction of the Opera.

The hotel proprietor and the _valet-de-chambre_ quickly searched the
dead man's room, but beyond the bag and its contents found nothing.
Afterwards they informed the police.

Meanwhile Raymond Diamond walked on, undecided how to act.  He had
already reached the Place de l'Opera, now bright beneath its many
electric lamps, before he had made up his mind.  He would go once again
in search of little Aggie's father, the man who owed him money.

Therefore he turned into the narrow Rue des Petit-Champs, and half-way
down entered a house, passed the _concierge_, and ascended to a flat on
the second floor.

Fully twenty times he had called there before, but the place was shut,
as its owner, an Englishman, was absent somewhere in the Midi.  When,
however, he rang, he heard movement within.

His heart leapt for joy, for when the door opened there stood Mr
Mullet, a tall, thin, red-haired man with a long pale face and a
reddish, bristly moustache, who, the moment he recognised his visitor,
stretched forth his hand in welcome.

"Come in, Doctor," he cried cheerily.  "I got back only this morning,
and the _concierge_ gave me your card.  I expected, however, you'd grown
tired of waiting, and returned to England.  How's my little Aggie?"

"She grows a bonnie girl, Mr Mullet--quite a bonnie girl," answered the
ugly little man.  "Gets on wonderfully well at school.  And Lady Gavin,
at the Manor, takes quite an interest in her."

"That's right.  I'm glad to hear it--very glad.  Though I'm a bit of a
rover, Doctor, I'm always thinking of the child you know.  Why--she must
be nearly thirteen now."

"Nearly.  It's fully six years since I took her off your hands."

"Fully."

And the two men sat down in the rather comfortable room of the tall,
cadaverous-looking man, a mining engineer, whose adventures would have
filled a volume.

David Mullet, or "Red Mullet" as his friends called him on account of
the colour of his hair, offered the Doctor a good cigar from his case,
poured out two glasses of brandy and soda, and after a chat took out two
notes of a thousand francs from the pocket-book he carried and handed
them to his visitor, receiving a receipt in return.

"I've been a long time paying, I'm afraid, Doctor," laughed the man
airily.  "But you know what kind of fellow I am!  Sometimes I'm flush of
money, and at others devilish hard up."

"I'm hard up, or I wouldn't press for this."

"My dear Doctor, it's been owing for two years.  And I'm very glad to
get out of your debt."

"Well, Mr Mullet," Diamond said, "eighty pounds is a lot to me just
now.  I haven't had a square meal for days, and to tell the truth I've
just been ordered out of my hotel."

"My dear fellow, that's happened to me dozens of times," laughed the
other.  "I never feel sorry for the proprietor.  I only regret that I
can't give tips to the servants.  I suppose you'll go back home--eh?"

"To-night, or by the first service in the morning."

"By Jove, I'd like to see my little Aggie.  I wonder," exclaimed the
man, "I wonder if I could manage to get across?"

"It isn't far," urged the Doctor.

But "Red Mullet" hesitated.  He had a cause to hesitate.  There was a
hidden reason why for the past three years he had not put foot on
English soil.

He shook his head sadly as he recognised that discretion was the better
part of valour.  He was too wary a man to run his neck into a noose.

"No," he said, "I think that in a few weeks I'll ask you to bring little
Aggie over here to see me.  You won't mind the trip--eh?"

"Not at all," was the reply.  "Aggie will hardly know her father, I
expect.  She looks upon me as her parent."

"That was what we arranged, Doctor.  She was to take your name, and you
were to bring her up as your own daughter.  I have a reason for that."

"So you told me six years ago."

"Red Mullet" nodded, and stretched out his long legs lazily as he
contemplated the smoke of his cigar ascending to the ceiling.
Recollections of his child had struck a sympathetic chord in his memory.
There were incidents in his life that he would fain have forgotten.
One of them was now recalled.

Quickly, however, the shadow passed, and his brow cleared.  He became
the same easy-going, humorous man he always had been, possessing a merry
_bonhomie_ and a fund of stories regarding his own amusing experiences
in various out-of-the-way corners of the world.

At last the Doctor, with eighty pounds in his pocket, rose and wished
his friend adieu.

Then he walked to a _brasserie_ in the Avenue de l'Opera, where he dined
well, concluding his meal with coffee and a liqueur, and at nine o'clock
he left the Gare du Nord for Calais and London.

The reason of his sudden flight from Paris was the fear of having
contravened the law by not calling in a French medical man when he knew
that the case of the mysterious Blanc was hopeless.  Detention would
mean trouble and much expense.  Therefore he deemed it best to get
across to England at the earliest possible moment.

At six o'clock next morning he found himself in a small hotel called the
Norfolk in Surrey Street, Strand, where he had on one or two occasions
stayed.  The waiter having brought up his breakfast, he locked the door
and, going to the table, he took from his pocket the packet of charred
paper and broken tinder which he had abstracted from the stove in Paris.

With infinite care he opened the handkerchief and spread it out.  The
tinder had broken into tiny fragments and some had been reduced to black
powder, while the half-charred paper split as he attempted to open it.

He had switched on the light, for the London dawn had not yet spread.
Then, seating himself at the table, he proceeded to examine and decipher
the remains of the papers which the dying man believed he had entirely
destroyed.

For some time he could make nothing of the lines of written words, which
had neither beginning nor end.

Suddenly, however, he held his breath.  He sat erect, statuesque, his
dark eyes staring at the paper.

Then he re-read the written lines eagerly.

"Great Heavens!  How strange!" he cried.  "How utterly astounding!  That
man who refused his name had learned the greatest and most important
secret this modern world of ours contains!  And it is in my
hands--_mine_!  My God!  Is it true--is it really true what this man
alleges?"

He paused and again re-read the smoke-blackened, half-burned pages.  For
some moments he sat with his mouth open in utter astonishment.  He could
scarcely believe his own eyes.

"His secret--his amazing secret, one unheard of--is mine!" he gasped,
glancing around the room, as though half-fearful lest he had been
overheard.  "I shall be a rich man--one of the richest in all Europe!
Before six months is out the whole world will be at the feet of Raymond
Diamond!"

CHAPTER THREE.

SHOWS ONE OF THE FRAGMENTS.

"Well," declared the Doctor, speaking to himself, "even my success in
intra-laryngeal operations was not half so interesting as this!"

And again he bent to examine the half-charred fragments before him.
Some were in typewriting, one was in a small fine script.  One hardly
legible was in German, others were in English, interspersed here and
there with words which he recognised were in Hebrew character.

In that small bedroom, beneath the rather dim electric light, the
deformed little man sat pouring over the folios so dry that they cracked
and crumbled when touched.

Much was undecipherable; the greater part had indeed been utterly
consumed, but here and there he was enabled to read consecutive
sentences, and those he made out utterly staggered him.

Indeed, so full of interest, so curious, and so amazing they would have
staggered anybody.

He held in his hands the dead man's secret--a secret that on the face of
it, seemed to be the strangest and at the same time the most unsuspected
in all the world.

Suddenly he sat back, and, staring straight across the narrow room,
exclaimed aloud:

"Why, there are men in the city this very day who'd give me ten thousand
pounds for the remains of these papers!  But would I sell them?  No--not
for ten times that amount!  Who knows what this discovery may not be
worth?"

He chuckled to himself.  Already he felt himself a wealthy man, a man
who could dictate his own terms in financial circles--a man who would be
welcomed in audience by crowned heads themselves!

He sighed, and the heavy exhalation blew a quantity of fragments of
tinder away upon the carpet.

"I wish I hadn't burned them quite so much," he said regretfully.  "Had
I had a newspaper handy I could have lit that instead.  Or--or I might
easily have delayed their destruction until--until after the end.  Yet
he seemed quite conscious, up to the very last moment.  No wonder he
regretted death before the fulfilment of the great work he had
commenced--no wonder he contemplated moving to the Grand Hotel at an
early date!  And yet," he added, after a pause, "it's all very
intricate, very indistinct, and requires a greater scholar than myself
to properly understand and unravel it."

The chief document, consisting of about ten typewritten pages in
English, had been badly burned.  It was this which he was now engaged in
trying to decipher.  At the top left-hand corner the sheets had
originally been held together by a paper-fastener, but that corner had
been consumed as well as all round the edges.  The centre alone of three
folios remained readable, even though it had been yellowed by smoke.

"There seem very many references to Israel, to Nebuchadnezzar, King of
Babylon, and to the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel.  Yet they seem to
convey nothing.  Ah!" he sighed, "if only I could reconstruct the
context.  There are Biblical references, too.  I must obtain a Bible."

So he rose, rang for a waiter, and asked him whether there was such a
thing in the hotel as a copy of Holy Writ.

The man, a young German, naturally regarded the visitor as an eccentric
person or a religious crank, but he went at once and borrowed a small
Bible from the chambermaid--a volume which afterwards proved to contain,
between its leaves, small texts of her Sunday-school days, several
pressed flowers, and a lock of hair.

A reference given upon one of the crinkled folios was "Ezekiel xxviii,
24."

Reseating himself after the young German had left, Raymond Diamond
hastily turned over the pages of the little well-thumbed Bible and found
what proved to be the prophecy of the restoration of Israel.

Another reference in the next line of the half-burnt screed was Ezekiel
xl, xli and xlii, no verses being designated.

On turning to these chapters, the doctor found that they contained a
description of Ezekiel's vision of the measuring of the temple.

Continuing, he read the further dimensions of the temple, the size of
the chambers for the priests, and the measures of the outer court "to
make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place."

All this conveyed to the deformed man but little.

That it had some connection with the strange secret was apparent, but in
what manner he failed to distinguish.

He had gathered broadly that the dead man's discovery was an amazing
one, and that a strange secret was revealed by those documents when they
were intact, but it was all so mystifying, so astounding, that he could
scarce give it shape within his own bewildered brain.

The enormous possibilities of the discovery had utterly dumbfounded
him--it was a discovery that was unheard of.

In order to present to the reader some idea of the fragments of the dead
man's papers lying upon the table before him, it may be of interest if
the present writer gives a photographic representation of one of the
badly burned folios.

As will easily be seen, the undestroyed fragment of the document showed
but little that was tangible.  Of interest, it was true, but the
interest was, alas! a well-concealed one.  The dead man was a scholar.
Of that there was no doubt whatsoever.  The doctor had recognised from
the first that he was no ordinary person.

The document seemed to be a portion of some statement made by a person
as to the curious and unexpected result of certain studies.

He who made the declaration had apparently been a student of the Talmud,
and especially the school of the Amoraim, or debaters, who about A.D.
250 expounded the "Mishna."

Raymond Diamond had long ago read Wunsche, Bacher and Strack, and from
them had learned how the Amoraim had expounded the "Mishna," and how
their labours had formed the Gemara, while the united Mishna and Gemara
formed the books of the Talmud.  By that time, and even earlier, the
teachers of Judaism were also working in the schools of Babylonis.
Hence the Talmud now exists in two forms--the Palestinian Talmud, or
Talmud of Jerusalem, and the Babylonian Talmud.  Rabbi Jehuda compiled
the "Mishna" which, in general, sums up the outcome of the activity of
the Sopherim, Zugoth and Tannaim, and thus became the canonical book of
the oral law.

He was recalling these facts as he sat staring at the half-charred
fragments on the table before him.

"The person making the declaration," he said aloud to himself, "appears
to have discovered certain hidden meanings in the `Mishna.'  Well--one
can read hidden meanings in most writings, I believe, if one wishes.
Yet he seems to have come across something which amazed him--some
cabalistic message very complicated and ingenious.  It caused him great
astonishment when he found himself able to--able to what?  Ah! that's
the point," he sighed.

Then, after another long pause, he decided that "nine ch--" meant "nine
chapters," and that the final lines of the page dealt with some
declaration opening with the arrival of the Messiah.

"Yes," he said in a hard decisive tone, straightening his crooked back
as well as he was able.  "There is a mystery explained here--a great and
most astounding mystery."

CHAPTER FOUR.

CONCERNS A CONSULTATION.

Late that same afternoon Raymond Diamond walked up the long muddy
by-road which led from Horsford station to the village, about a mile
distant.

Horsford was an obscure little place, still quite out-of-the-world, even
in these days of trains and motor-cars.

About four miles west of Peterborough on the edge of the fox-hunting
country, it was a pleasant little spot consisting of a beautiful old
Norman church, with one of the finest towers in England and one long,
straggling street mostly of thatched houses.

There were only two large houses--Horsford House, at the top of the hill
on the Peterborough side, and the Manor, an old seventeenth-century
mansion, half-way down the village.

It was not yet dark when the Doctor, the only arrival by train, turned
the corner by the Wheel Inn and entered the village.  As he did so,
Warr, who combined the business of publican and village butcher, wished
him a cheery "Good evenin', Doctor."

And as the little man trudged up the long street he was greeted with
many such salutes, to all of which he answered mechanically, for he was
thinking--thinking deeply.

The fragrant smell of burning wood from the cottages greeted his
nostrils--the smell of that quiet little village which for some years
had been his home.

He breathed again in that rural peace, as a dozen cows slowly plodded
past him.

At last he turned from the main street, up a short, steep hill where, at
the end of a small _cul-de-sac_, stood a long, old-fashioned,
two-storied cottage with its dormer-windows peeping forth from the brown
thatch.  In summer, over the whole front of it spread a wealth of
climbing roses, but now, in winter, only the brown leafless branches
remained.

In the small, well-kept front garden were a number of well-trimmed
evergreens, while an old box-hedge ran around the tiny domain.

As he lifted the latch of the gate, Mrs Diamond, a neat, well-preserved
woman in black, threw open the door with a cheery welcome, and a moment
later he was in his own old-fashioned little dining-room, warming
himself at the fire, which, sending forth a ruddy glow, illuminated the
room.

For such a humble home, it was quite a cosy apartment.  Upon the
old-fashioned oak-dresser at the end were one or two pieces of blue
china, and on the oak overmantel were a few odd pieces of Worcester and
Delft.  On the walls were one or two engravings, while the furniture was
of antique pattern and well in keeping with the place.

The doctor possessed artistic tastes, and was also a connoisseur to no
small degree.  In the days when he had possessed means, he had been fond
of hunting for curios or making purchases of old furniture and china,
but, alas! in these latter days of his adversity he had experienced even
a difficulty in making both ends meet.

"I received your telegram, Raymond dear," exclaimed Mrs Diamond.  "I'm
so glad you were successful in finding Aggie's father.  It's taken a
great weight from my mind."

"And from mine also," he said with a sigh seated before the fire with
his hands outstretched to the flames.  "Mullet wants me to take the
child over to Paris to see him in a week or so."

"Why does he not come over here?"

The Doctor pulled a wry face, and shrugged his shoulders ominously.

His wife, by her speech, showed herself to be a woman of refinement.
She had been the widow of a medical man in Manchester before Diamond had
married her.  Though it was much against her grain to submit to
registration as a foster-mother of children, yet it had been their only
course.  Raymond Diamond was too ugly to succeed in his profession.  The
public dislike a deformed doctor.

He told his wife how he had been at the end of his resources in Paris,
and how, just at the moment when things had looked blackest, "Red
Mullet" had returned.  But he made no mention of meeting the stranger,
or of the record of the curious secret which, between two pieces of
cardboard, now reposed carefully in his breast-pocket.

Its possession held him in a kind of stupor.  From what he had been able
to gather--or rather from what he imagined the truth to be--he already
felt himself an immensely wealthy man.  He was, in fact, already
planning out his own future.

The dead stranger had said he intended to remove to the Grand Hotel.
Diamond's intention was to go further--to purchase a fine estate
somewhere in the grass-country, and in future live the life of a
gentleman.

Mrs Diamond noticed her husband's preoccupied manner, and naturally
attributed it to financial embarrassment.

A few moments later the door opened, and a pretty, fair-haired girl,
about thirteen, entered, and finding the doctor had returned, rushed
towards him and, throwing her arms about his neck, kissed him, saying:

"I had no idea you were back again, dad.  I went down the station-path
half-way, expecting to meet you."

"I came by the road, my child," was the Doctor's reply as he stroked her
long fair hair.  "I've been to Paris--to see your dad, Aggie," he added.

"My other dad," repeated the child reflectively.  "I--I hardly remember
him.  You are my own dear old dad!"  And she stroked his cheek with her
soft hand.

Aggie was the doctor's favourite.  He was devoted to the daughter of
that tall, thin man who was such a cosmopolitan adventurer, the child
who was now the eldest of his family, and who had, ever since she had
arrived, a wee weakly little thing, always charmed him by her bright
intelligence and merry chatter.

She was a distinctly pretty child, neat in her dark-blue frock and white
pinafore.  In the village school she was head of her class, and Mr
Holmes, the popular, good-humoured schoolmaster, had already suggested
to the Doctor, and also to Lady Gavin at the Manor, that she should be
sent to the Secondary School at Peterborough now that he could teach her
no more.

The Doctor drew Aggie upon his knee, and told her of her father's
inquiries and of his suggestion that she should go to Paris to see him.

Paris seemed to the child such a long way off.  She had seen it marked
upon the wall-maps in school, but to her youthful mind it was only a
legendary city.

"I don't want to leave Horsford, dad," replied the girl with a slight
pout.  "I want to remain with you."

"Not in order to see and know your father?"

"You are my dad--my only dad," she declared quickly.  "I don't want to
see my other dad at all," she added decisively.  "If he wants to see me,
why doesn't he come here?"

"He can't my dear," replied the doctor.  "But tell me.  Have you seen
Lady Gavin since I've been away?"

"No, dad.  Mr Farquhar and his sister have come to stay at the Manor,
so she's always engaged."

"Frank Farquhar is down here again, eh?" asked Diamond quickly.  Then he
reflected deeply for a few moments.

He was wondering if Farquhar could help him--if he dare take the young
man into his confidence.

Nowadays he was "out of it."  He knew nobody, buried there as he was in
that rural solitude.

"Is Sir George at home?" he asked the child, who, like all other
children, knew the whole gossip of the village.

"No, dad.  He started for Egypt yesterday.  Will Chapman told me so."

The Doctor ate his tea, with his wife and five "daughters" of varying
ages, all bright, bonnie children, who looked the picture of good
health.

Then, after a wash and putting on another suit, he went out, strolling
down the village to where the big old Manor House, with its quaint
gables and wide porch, stood far back behind its sloping lawn.

Generations of squires of Horsford had lived and died there, as their
tombs in the splendid Norman church almost adjoining testified.  It was
a house where many of the rooms were panelled, where the entrance-hall
was of stone, with a well staircase and a real "priests' hole" on the
first floor.

He ascended the steps, and his ring was answered by a smart Italian
man-servant.  Yes.  Mr Farquhar was at home.  Would the doctor kindly
step into the library?

Diamond entered that well-known room on the right of the hall--a room
lined from floor to ceiling with books in real Chippendale bookcases,
and in the centre a big old-fashioned writing-table.  Over the fireplace
were several ancient manuscripts in neat frames, while beside the
blazing fire stood a couple of big saddle-bag chairs.

Sir George Gavin, Baronet, posed to the world as a literary man, though
he had risen from the humble trade of a compositor to become owner of a
number of popular newspapers.  He knew nothing about literature and
cared less.  He left all such matters to the editors and writers whom he
paid--clever men who earned for him the magnificent income which he now
enjoyed.  Upon the cover of one of his periodicals it was stated that he
was editor.  But as a matter of fact he hardly ever saw the magazine in
question, except perhaps upon the railway bookstalls.  His sole thought
was the handsome return its publication produced.  And, like so many
other men in our England to-day, he had simply "paid up" and received
his baronetcy among the Birthday honours, just as he had received his
membership of the Carlton.

Diamond had not long to wait, for in a few moments the door opened, and
there entered a smart-looking, dark-haired young man in a blue serge
suit.

"Hulloa, Doc!  How are you?" he exclaimed.  "I'm back again, you see--
just down for a day or two to see my sister.  And how has Horsford been
progressing during my absence--eh?" he laughed.

Frank Farquhar, Lady Gavin's younger brother, occupied an important
position in the journalistic concern of which Sir George was the head.
He was recognised by journalistic London as one of its smartest young
men.  His career at Oxford had been exceptionally brilliant, and he had
already distinguished himself as special correspondent in the Boer and
Russo-Japanese campaigns before Sir George Gavin had invited him to join
his staff.

Tall, lithe, well set-up, with a dark, rather acquiline face, a small
dark moustache, and a pair of sharp, intelligent eyes, he was alert,
quick of movement, and altogether a "live" journalist.

The two men seated themselves on either side of the fireplace, and
Farquhar, having offered his visitor a cigar, settled himself to listen
to Diamond's story.

"I've come to you," the Doctor explained, "because I believe that you,
and perhaps Sir George also, can help me.  Don't think that I want any
financial assistance," he laughed.  "Not at all.  I want to put before
you a matter which is unheard of, and which I am certain will astound
even you--a journalist."

"Well, Doc," remarked the young man with a smile, "it takes a lot to
surprise us in Fleet Street, you know."

"This will.  Listen."  And then, having extracted a promise of silence,
Diamond related to the young man the whole story of the dead stranger,
and the curious document that had been only half-consumed.

When the Doctor explained that the papers had not been wholly burned,
Frank Farquhar rose quickly in pretence of obtaining an ash-tray, but in
reality in order to conceal the strange expression which at that, moment
overspread his countenance.

Then, a few seconds later, he returned to his chair apparently quite
unmoved and unconcerned.  Truth to tell, however, the statement made by
the dwarfed and deformed man before him had caused him to tighten his
lips and hold his breath.

Was it possible that he held certain secret knowledge of which the
Doctor was ignorant, and which he could turn to advantage?

He remained silent, with a smile of incredulity playing about his mouth.

The truth was this.  Within his heart he had already formed a fixed
intention that the dead man's secret--the most remarkable secret of the
age--should be his, and his alone!

CHAPTER FIVE.

SPREADS THE NET.

The deformed man existed in a whirl of excitement.  He already felt
himself rich beyond his wildest dreams.  He built castles in the air
like a child, and smiled contentedly when rich people--some of the
hunting crowd--passed him by unrecognised.

During the three days that followed, Frank Farquhar held several
consultations with him--long earnest talks sometimes at the Manor or
else while walking across that heath-land around the district known to
the followers to hounds as the Horsford Hanglands.

The villagers who saw them together made no comment.  As was well known,
the little Doctor and Lady Gavin's clever young brother were friends.

Diamond had enjoined the strictest secrecy, but Farquhar, as a keen man
of business and determined to put his knowledge to the best advantage,
had already exchanged several telegrams with some person in London, and
was now delaying matters with Diamond until he obtained a decided reply.

On the fourth day, just after breakfast, Burton, the grave old butler,
handed the young man a telegram which caused him to smile with
satisfaction.  He crushed it into his pocket and, seizing his hat,
walked along to the Doctor's cottage.  Then the pair took a slow stroll
up the short, steep hill on to the Peterborough road, through the damp
mists of the winter's morning.  Away across the meadows on the left,
hounds were in full cry, a pretty sight, but neither noticed the
incident.

"Do you know, Doctor," exclaimed the young man as soon as they got
beyond the village, "I've been thinking very seriously over the affair,
and I've come to the conclusion that unless we put it before some great
Hebrew scholar we shall never get down to the truth.  The whole basis of
the secret is the Hebrew language, without a doubt.  What can we do
alone--you and I?"

The little Doctor shook his head dubiously.

"I admit that neither of us is sufficiently well versed in Jewish
history properly to understand the references which are given in the
fragments which remain to us," he said.  "Yet if we go to a scholar,
explain our views, and show him the documents, should we not be giving
away what is evidently a most valuable secret?"

"No.  I hardly think that," answered the shrewd young man.  "Before
putting it to any scholar we should first make terms with him, so that
he may not go behind our backs and profit upon the information."

"You can't do that!" declared Diamond.

"Among scholars there are a good many honourable men," replied Frank
Farquhar, with a glance of cunning.  "If we proposed to deal with City
sharks, it would be quite a different matter."

"Then to whom do you propose we should submit the documents for expert
opinion?" inquired the deformed man, as he trudged along at his side.

"I know a man up in London whom I implicitly trust, and who will treat
the whole matter in strictest confidence," was the other's reply.  "We
can do nothing further down here.  I'm going up to town this afternoon,
and if you like I'll call and see him."

The Doctor hesitated.  He recognised in the young man's suggestion a
desire to obtain his precious fragments and submit them to an expert.
Most deformed men are gifted with unusually shrewd intelligence, and
Raymond Diamond was certainly no exception.  He smiled within himself at
Frank Farquhar's artless proposal.

"Who is the man?" he asked, as though half-inclined to adopt the
suggestion.

"I know two men.  One is named Segal--a professor who writes for our
papers; an exceedingly clever chap, who'd be certain to make out
something more from the puzzle than we ever can hope to do.  I also know
Professor Griffin."

"I shall not allow the papers out of my possession."

"Or all that remains of them, you mean," laughed the young man uneasily.
"Why, of course not.  That would be foolish."

"Foolish in our mutual interests," Diamond went on.  "You are interested
with myself, Mr Farquhar, in whatever profits may accrue from the
affair."

"Then if our interests are to be mutual, Doctor, why not entrust the
further investigation to me?" suggested the wily young man.  "I hope you
know me sufficiently well to have confidence in my honesty."

The Doctor cast a sharp look at the little young fellow at his side.

"Why, of course, Mr Farquhar," he laughed.  "As I've already said, you
possess facilities for investigating the affair which I do not.  If what
I suspect be true, we have, in our hands, the solution of a problem
which will startle the world.  I have sought your assistance, and I'm
prepared to give you--well, shall we say fifteen per cent, interest on
whatever the secret may realise?"

"It may, after all, be only historical knowledge," laughed young
Farquhar.  "How can you reduce that into `the best and brightest?'
Still, I accept.  Fifteen per cent is to be my share of whatever profit
may accrue.  Good!  I only wish Sir George were home from Egypt.  He
would, no doubt, give us assistance."

The Doctor purposely disregarded this last remark.  He held more than a
suspicion that young Farquhar intended to "freeze him out."

"When are you going up to town?" he asked.

"This afternoon.  I shall see my man in the morning, and I feel sure
that if I put the problem before him he'll be able, before long, to give
us some tangible solution," was Frank's reply.  "When I act, I act
promptly, you know."

The Doctor was undecided.  He knew quite well that young Farquhar was
acquainted with all sorts of writers and scholars, and that possibly
among them were men who were experts in Hebrew, and in the history of
the House of Israel.

He reflected.  If the young man were content with fifteen per cent, what
had he further to fear?

Therefore, after some further persuasion on Frank's part, he promised to
write out an agreement upon a fifteen per cent, basis, and submit the
fragments to the young man's friend.

They returned to the village, and the Doctor promised to call upon him
at noon with an agreement written out.

This he did, and in the library at the Manor Frank appended his
signature, receiving in return the precious fragments carefully
preserved between the two pieces of cardboard.

When the deformed man had left, Frank Farquhar lit a cigarette, and
stretching his legs as he sat in the armchair, laughed aloud in triumph.

"Now if I tie down old Griffin the secret will be mine," he remarked
aloud.  "I've already `wired' to Gwen, so she'll expect me at eight, and
no doubt tell her father."

At five o'clock Sir George's red "Mercedes" came round to the front of
the house to take Frank into Peterborough, and half an hour later he was
in the "up-Scotsman" speeding towards King's Cross, bearing with him the
secret which he felt confident was to set the whole world by the ears.

He dropped his bag at his rooms in Half Moon Street, had a wash and a
snack to eat at his club, the New Universities, round in St James's
Street, and then drove in a taxi-cab to a large, rather comfortable
house in Pembridge Gardens, that turning exactly opposite Notting Hill
Gate Station.

Standing behind the neat maid-servant who opened the door was a tall,
dark-haired, handsome girl not yet twenty, slim, narrow-waisted, and
essentially dainty and refined.

"Why, Frank!" she cried, rushing towards him.  "What's all this
excitement.  I'm so interested.  Dad has been most impatient to see you.
After your letter the day before yesterday, he's been expecting you
almost every hour."

"Well, the fact is, Gwen, I couldn't get the business through," he said
with a laugh.  "We had terms to arrange--and all that."

"Terms of what?" asked the girl, as he linked his arm in hers and they
walked together into the long, well-furnished dining-room.

"I'll tell you all about it presently, dear," he replied.

"About the secret?" she asked anxiously.  "Dad showed me your letter.
It is really intensely interesting--if what you suspect be actually the
truth."

"Interesting!" he echoed.  "I should rather think it is.  It's a thing
that will startle the whole civilised world in a few days.  And the
curious and most romantic point is that we can't find out who was the
original holder of the information.  He died in Paris, refusing to give
his real name, or any account of himself.  But there," he added, "I'll
tell you all about it later on.  How is my darling?"

And he bent until their lips met in a long, fervent caress.

Her arms were entwined about his neck, for she loved him with the whole
strength of her being, and her choice was looked upon with entire favour
by her father.  Frank Farquhar was a rising man, the adopted candidate
for a Yorkshire borough, while from his interest in Sir George Gavin's
successful publications he derived a very handsome income for a man of
his years.

"I've been longing for your return, dearest," she murmured in his ear as
he kissed her.  "It seems ages ago since you left town."

"Only a month.  I went first to Perthshire, where I had to speak at some
Primrose League meetings.  Then I had business in both Newcastle and
Manchester, and afterwards I went to Horsford to see my sister.  I was
due to stay there another fortnight, but this strange discovery brings
me up to consult your father."

"He's upstairs in the study.  We'd better go up at once.  He's dying to
see you," declared the bright-eyed girl, who wore a big black silk bow
in her hair.  She possessed a sweet innocent face, a pale soft
countenance indicative of purity of soul.  The pair were, indeed, well
matched, each devoted to the other; he full of admiration of her beauty
and her talents, and she proud of his brilliant success in journalism
and literature.

At the throat of her white silk blouse she wore a curious antique
brooch, an old engraved sapphire which Sir Charles Gaylor, a friend of
Dr Griffin, had some years ago brought from the excavation he had made
in the mound of Nebi-Yunus, near Layard's researches in the vicinity of
Nineveh.  The rich blue gleamed in the gaslight, catching Frank's eye as
he ascended the stair, and he remarked that she was wearing what she
termed her "lucky brooch," a gem which had no doubt adorned some
maiden's breast in the days of Sennacherib or Esarhaddon.

The first-floor front room, which in all other houses in Pembridge
Gardens was the drawing-room, had in the house of Professor Griffin been
converted into the study--a big apartment lined with books which, for
the most part, were of "a dry-as-dust" character.

As they entered, the Professor, a short, stout, grey-haired man in round
steel-framed spectacles, raised himself from his armchair, where he had
been engrossed in an article in a German review.

"Ah! my dear Farquhar!" he cried excitedly.  "Gwen told me that you were
on your way--but there, you are such a very erratic fellow that I never
know when to expect you."

"I generally turn up when least expected," laughed the young man, with a
side-glance at the girl.

"Well, well," exclaimed the man in spectacles; "now what is all this
you've written to me about?  What `cock-and-bull' story have you got
hold of now--eh?"

"I briefly explained in my letter," he answered.  "Isn't it very
remarkable?  What's your opinion?"

"Ah! you journalists!" exclaimed the old professor reprovingly.  "You've
a lot to answer for to the unsuspecting public."

"I admit that," laughed Frank.  "But do you really dismiss the matter as
a `cock-and-bull' story?"

"That is how I regard it at the moment--without having been shown
anything."

"Then I can show you everything," was Farquhar's prompt reply.  "I have
it all with me--at least all that remains of it."

The old man smiled satirically.  As Regius Professor of Hebrew at
Cambridge, Dr Arminger Griffin was not a man to accept lightly any
theory placed before him by an irresponsible writer such as he knew
Frank Farquhar to be.

He suspected a journalistic "boom" to be at the bottom of the affair,
and of all things he hated most in the world was the halfpenny press.

Frank had first met Gwen while he had been at college, and had often
been a visitor at the professor's house out on Grange Road, prior to his
retirement and return to London.  He knew well in what contempt the old
man held the popular portion of the daily press, and especially the
London evening journals.  Therefore he never sought to obtrude his
profession when in his presence.

"Well?" said the old gentleman at last, peering above his glasses.  "I
certainly am interested in the story, and I would like to examine what
you've brought.  Burnt papers--aren't they?"

"Yes."

"H'm.  Savours of romance," sniffed the professor.  "That's why I don't
like it.  The alleged secret itself is attractive enough, without an
additional and probably wholly fictitious interest."

Frank explained how the fragments had fallen into his hands, and the
suggestion which Doctor Diamond had made as to the possibility of a
financial value of the secret.

"My dear Frank," replied the professor, "if it were a secret invention,
a new pill, or some scented soap attractive to women, it might be worth
something in the City.  But a secret such as you allege,"--and he
shrugged his shoulders ominously without concluding his sentence.

"Ah!" laughed the young man.  "I see you're sceptical.  Well, I don't
wonder at that.  Some men of undoubted ability and great knowledge
declare that the Bible was not inspired."

"I am not one of those," the professor hastened to declare.

"No, Frank," exclaimed the girl.  "Dad is not an agnostic.  He only
doubts the genuineness of this secret of yours."

"He condemns the whole thing as a `cock-and-bull' story, without first
investigating it!" said Farquhar with a grin.  "Good!  I wonder whether
your father will be of the same opinion after he has examined the
fragments of the dead man's manuscript which remain to us?"

"Don't talk of the dead man's manuscript!" exclaimed the old professor
impatiently, "even though the man is dead, it's in typewriting, you
say--therefore there must exist somebody who typed it.  He, or she, must
still be alive!"

"By Jove!" gasped the young man quickly, "I never thought of that!  The
typing is probably only a copy of a written manuscript.  The original
may still exist.  And in any case the typist would be able to supply to
a great degree the missing portions of the document."

"Yes," said the other.  "It would be far more advantageous to you to
find the typist than to consult me.  I fear I can only give you a
negative opinion."

CHAPTER SIX.

GIVES EXPERT OPINION.

Frank Farquhar was cleverly working his own game.  The Professor had
scoffed at the theory put forward by Diamond, therefore he was easily
induced to give a written undertaking to regard the knowledge derived
from the half-burnt manuscript as strictly confidential, and to make no
use of it to his own personal advantage.

"I have to obtain this," the young man explained, "in the interests of
Diamond, who, after all, is possessor of the papers.  He allowed me to
have them only on that understanding."

"My dear Frank," laughed the great Hebrew scholar, "really all this is
very absurd.  But of course I'll sign any document you wish."

So amid some laughter a brief undertaking was signed, "in order that I
may show to Diamond," as Frank put it.

"It's really a most businesslike affair," declared Gwen, who witnessed
her father's signature.  "The secret must be a most wonderful one."

"It is, dear," declared her lover.  "Wait and hear your father's
opinion.  He is one of the very few men in the whole kingdom competent
to judge whether the declaration is one worthy of investigation."

The Professor was seated at his writing-table placed near the left-hand
window, and had just signed the document airily, with a feeling that the
whole matter was a myth.  Upon the table was his green-shaded electric
reading-lamp, and with his head within the zone of its mellow light he
sat, his bearded chin resting upon his palm, looking at the man to whom
he had promised his daughter's hand.

A scholar of his stamp is always very slow to commit himself to any
opinion.  The Hebrew professor, whoever he may be, follows recognised
lines, and has neither desire nor inclination to depart from them.  It
was so with Griffin.  Truth to tell, he was much interested in the
problem which young Farquhar had placed before him, but at the same time
the suggestion made by Doctor Diamond was so startling and unheard of
that, within himself, he laughed at the idea, regarding it as a mere
newspaper sensation, invented in the brain of some clever Continental
swindler.

From his pocket the young man drew forth the precious envelope, and out
of it took the cards between which reposed three pieces of crinkled and
smoke-blackened typewriting, the edges of which had all been badly
burned.

The first which he placed with infinite care, touching it as lightly as
possible, upon the Professor's blotting-pad was the page already
reproduced--the folio which referred to the studying of the "Mishna" and
the cabalistic signs which the writer had apparently discovered therein.

The old man, blinking through his heavy round glasses, examined the
disjointed words and unfinished lines, grunted once or twice in
undisguised dissatisfaction, and placed the fragment aside.

"Well?" inquired Farquhar, eagerly, "does that convey anything to you?"

The Professor pursed his lips in quiet disbelief.

"The prologue of a very elegant piece of fiction," he sneered.  "The man
who makes this statement ought certainly to have been a novelist."

"Why?"

"Because of the clever manner in which he introduces his subject.  But
let us continue."

With delicate fingers Frank Farquhar handled the next scrap of
typewriting and placed it before the great expert.

The folio in question apparently attracted Professor Griffin much more
than the first one presented to him.  He read and re-read it, his grey
face the whole time heavy and thoughtful.  He was reconstructing the
context in his own mind, and its reconstruction evidently caused him
deep and very serious reflection.

A dozen times he re-read it, while Frank and Gwen stood by exchanging
glances in silence.

"The first portion of the statement on this folio is quite plain,"
remarked the Professor at last, looking up and blinking at the young
man.  "The writer indicates the Biblical fact that, after the Babylonian
imprisonment the tablets of Moses were never again exhibited in the
Temple.  Surely this is not any amazing discovery!  Every reader of the
Old Testament is aware of that fact.  The prophet Ezekiel himself was
one of the temple priests deported to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar in 597
B.C.  You'll find mention of it in Ezekiel, i, 2-8.  His message
consisted at first of denunciations of his countrymen, both in Babylon
and in Palestine, but after the fall of Jerusalem in 586 B.C. he became
a prophet of consolation, promising the eventual deliverance and
restoration of the chosen people.  Give me down the Bible, Gwen, dear,
and also Skinner--the `Expositor's Bible.'  You'll see it in the second
case--third shelf to the left."

The girl crossed the room, and after a moment's search returned with the
two volumes, which she placed before her father.

"Nebuchadnezzar received certain vessels from the temple at Jerusalem.
Well, we know that," remarked the old man, as he opened the copy of Holy
Writ and slowly turned its pages.

"The reference in the book of Ezra," he said, referring to the open book
before him, "concerns the proclamation of Cyrus, King of Persia, for the
building of the temple in Jerusalem, how the people provided for the
return, and how Cyrus restored the vessels of the temple to Sheshbazzar,
the Prince of Judah."  Then, turning to Gwen, he said: "Read the verses
referred to, dear--seventh to the eleventh in the first chapter."

The girl bent over the Bible, and read the verses aloud as follows:

"Also Cyrus the King brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord,
which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put
them in the house of his gods;

"Even those did Cyrus King of Persia bring forth by the hand of
Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the Prince
of Judah.

"And this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a thousand
chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives,

"Thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a second _sort_ four hundred
and ten, _and_ other vessels a thousand.

"All the vessels of gold and silver _were_ five thousand and four
hundred.  All _these_ did Sheshbazzar bring up with _them_ of the
captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem."

"Surely that is sufficient historical fact!" the old Professor said in
his hard, "dry-as-dust" voice.  "Again, farther on, there is, you see, a
statement that Titus destroyed Jerusalem and that he built the Arch of
Triumph in Rome and placed a representation of the candlesticks upon it.
Does not every schoolboy know that!  Bosh! my dear Frank!"

"True," exclaimed Frank, "but see! in the next line but one is a
reference to the existence of something in `the whole prophecy of
Ezekiel'--something in `black and white.'"

Professor Griffin shrugged his shoulders.

"Ezekiel develops the doctrine of individual responsibility and of the
Messianic kingdom as no prophet before him," was the Professor's reply.
"It may refer to that.  The prophet's style is not of the highest order,
but is extraordinarily rich and striking in its imagery.  The
authenticity of the book is now admitted, all but universally, but the
corrupt state of the Hebrew text has, for ages, been the despair of
students.  Cornhill, in 1886, made a brilliant attempt to reconstruct
the Hebrew text with the aid of the Septuagint."

Griffin noticed that his young friend did not quite follow that last
remark, so he added:

"The Septuagint is, as you may perhaps know, the earliest Greek
translation of the Old Testament scriptures made directly from the
Hebrew original during the third century before Christ for the use of
the Hellenistic Jews.  In the literary forgery produced about the
Christian era, known as the `Letter of Aristeas,' and accepted as
genuine by Josephus and others, it is alleged that the translation was
made by seventy-two men at the command of Ptolemy II.  You will find
portions of it in the British Museum, and from it we find that the
translation is not of uniform value or of the same style throughout.
The Pentateuch and later historical books, as well as the Psalms,
exhibit a very fair rendering of the original.  The prophetical books,
and more especially Ezekiel, show greater divergence from the Hebrew,
while Proverbs frequently display loose paraphrase."

"But is there anything in those typed lines which strikes you as
unusually curious?" demanded young Farquhar, pointing to the smoked and
charred fragment upon the blotting-pad.

The Professor was silent for a moment, his eyes fixed upon the
disjointed and unfinished sentences.

"Well--yes.  There is something," was his answer.  "That statement that
something exists in `the whole prophecy of Ezekiel.'  What is that
something?"

"Is it what Doctor Diamond suspects it to be, do you think?"

"I can form no definite conclusion until I have investigated the whole,"
was the great scholar's response.  "But I would, at this point, withdraw
my own light remarks of half an hour ago.  There may be something of
interest in it, but what the picturesque story is all leading up to I
cannot quite imagine."

"To a secret--to the solution of a great and undreamed-of mystery!"
declared Frank excitedly.

"The last few lines of this scrap before me certainly leads towards that
supposition," was the answer of Gwen Griffin's father.

"Then you do not altogether negative Diamond's theory that there is
here, if we can only supply the context, the key to the greatest secret
this world has ever known!"

"Ah! that is saying a good deal," was the reply.  "Let me continue the
investigation of this wonderful document which the dying man was so
anxious to destroy."

And by the sphinx-like expression upon the old man's face it was
apparent that he had already gathered more information than he was
willing to admit.

The truth was that the theory he had already formed within his own mind
held him bewildered.  His thin fingers trembled as he touched the dried,
crinkled folio.

There was a secret there--without a doubt, colossal and astounding--one
of which even the greatest scholars in Europe through all the ages had
never dreamed!

The old man sat staring through his spectacles in abject wonder.

Was Doctor Diamond's theory really the correct one?  If so, what right
had these most precious papers to be in the hands of an irresponsible
journalist?

If there was really a secret, together with its solution--then the
latter must be his, and his alone, he decided.  How it would enhance his
great reputation if he were the person to launch it forth upon the
world!

Therefore the old man's attitude suddenly changed and he pretended to
regard the affair humorously, in the hope of putting Frank off his
guard.

If the world was ever to be startled by the discovery it should, he
intended, be by Professor Arminger Griffin, and not through any one of
those irresponsible halfpenny sheets controlled by Sir George Gavin and
his smart and ingenious young brother-in-law.

Both Frank Farquhar and Gwen noticed the old man's sudden change of
manner, and stood puzzled and wondering, little dreaming what was
passing with his mind.

Few men are--alas!--honest where their own reputations are at stake.

CHAPTER SEVEN.

IN WHICH THE PROFESSOR EXHIBITS CUNNING.

Frank was fully aware that Professor Griffin was an eccentric man, full
of strange moods and strong prejudices.  Most scholars and writers are.

"But, dad," exclaimed his daughter, placing her soft hand upon his
shoulder, "what do you really think of it?  Is there anything in this
Doctor Diamond's theory?"

"My dear child, I never jump to conclusions, as you know.  It is against
my habit.  It's probably one of the many hoaxes which have been
practised for the last thousand years."

The girl exchanged a quick glance with her lover.  She could see that
Frank was annoyed by the light manner with which her father treated the
alleged secret.

"Well, Professor," said the young man at last, "this, apparently, is the
next folio, though the numbering of each has been destroyed," and he
placed before the man in spectacles another scrap which presented the
appearance as shown.

In an instant the old man became intensely interested though he
endeavoured very cleverly to conceal the fact.  He bent, and taking up a
large magnifying-glass mounted in silver--a gift from Frank on the
previous Christmas--he carefully examined each word in its order.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "the first three lines, underlined as you see, are
apparently a portion of some prophecy regarding the captivity of the
Jews in Babylon, `the period of the Blood-debts,' after which comes the
period when the oppression will lose its power, which means their
release by Cyras.  Come now, this is of some interest!"

"Read on, dad," urged the dainty girl, excitedly.  "Tell us what you
gather from it."

The pair were standing hand-in-hand, at the back of the old man's
writing-chair.

"Not so quickly, dear--not so quickly.  That's the worst of women.  They
are always so erratic, always in such an uncommon hurry," he added with
a laugh.

Then, after a pause during which he carefully examined the lines which
followed, he pointed out: "You see that somebody--not the writer of the
document, remember--has stated that Moses' tablets `The Cha--', which
must mean the Chair of Grace, between two cherubims of fine gold, a
number of other things, including the Ark of the Covenant itself and the
archives of the Temple down to B.C. 600 are--what?"

And he raised his head staring at the pair through his round and greatly
magnifying-glasses.

"Doctor Diamond's theory is that the treasures of Solomon's Temple are
still concealed at the spot where they were hidden by the priests before
the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar."

The Professor laughed aloud.

"My dear Farquhar," he exclaimed, "on the face of this folio it would,
of course, appear so.  One may read it as a statement of fact that all
the relics of the Temple and all the great treasures of the ages
bygone--the Treasure of Israel--are concealed `beneath',
somewhere--`which is a series' of something.  To this, there are three
entrances, one only being accessible.  Then in the final lines, we have
another prophecy that the tablets shall `remain in their hiding-place--
that is with the Ark of the Covenant--till the coming of the Messiah who
alone may open the treasure-house, or place of concealment, in order
that he may show proof of--', and the rest is lost." he added with a
sigh of disappointment.

"I admit," said Frank, "that is one reading of it.  But what is your
reading--that of an expert?"

The old man merely shrugged his shoulders and said:

"I don't think that the Doctor's theory is the correct one.  The belief
that the Treasure of Solomon's Temple still exists is far too wild and
unsubstantiated.  Of course, it is not quite clear in history what
became of the contents of the Temple, but I think we may safely at once
dismiss any possibility of the relics of Moses as being intact after a
couple of thousand years or so.  Stories of hidden treasure have
appealed to the avarice of man throughout all the ages, from the days of
the Roman Emperors, down to the day before yesterday, when a ship went
forth to search for the lost gold of President Kruger.  There have been
hundreds, nay thousands of expeditions to search for treasure, but in
nearly every case the searchers have returned sadder and poorer men.
No, Frank," he exclaimed, decisively, "I don't think any one would be
such an utter fool as to attempt to suggest that the Treasure of Israel
still exists.  At least no scholar would.  Whoever would do such a thing
would be a clumsy bungler, ignorant of both the Hebrew language and the
history of the Hebrew nation.  Doctor Diamond, from what you tell me,
is, I gather, one of such."

"But they are not the Doctor's documents," Frank hastened to point out.
"As I've told you, a man dying in Paris ordered him to burn them.  He
did so, but they were not all consumed."

"The Doctor worked a trick upon a dying man," sniffed the Professor.
"Hardly played the game--eh?"

"I quite agree with you there," answered young Farquhar.  "Yet,
according to the Doctor's version, he was in no way responsible for the
fact that only half the folios were consumed."

"Well, whatever it is," declared the Professor, very decisively, "it
seems to be some rather clumsy `cock-and-bull' story.  In what I've
read.  I, as a scholar, could pick many holes.  Indeed, such a screed as
this could never have been concocted by any one with any pretence of
knowledge of old Testament history.  There are certain statements which
are utterly absurd on the face of them."

"Which are they?" inquired Frank eagerly.

"Oh--several," was the rather light reply.  "As you are not a scholar,
my dear boy, it would be useless me going into long and technical
explanations.  The disjointed bits of prophecy are, I admit, really most
artistic," he added with a laugh.

If the truth be told, Arminger Griffin was concealing the intense
excitement that had been aroused within him.  He was making a
discovery--a wonderful, an amazing discovery.  But to this young
journalist, who would merely regard it as a good "boom" for one of his
irresponsible halfpenny journals, he intended to pooh-pooh it as a mere
clumsy fairy tale.

"Well," he asked, a moment later, in an incredulous tone.  "What else
have you to show me?"

"No more typewriting," was Frank's reply.  "The only other folio is one
of manuscript, and it will probably interest you, for it contains two
Hebrew words," and he placed before the great expert a half-consumed
fragment of lined manuscript paper which bore some close writing in
English of which the present writer gives a facsimile here.

"H'm," grunted the old man, after a swift glance at it.  "A copy,
evidently.  The Hebrew words are too clumsily written.  No scholar wrote
them.  Probably it's a translation from German or Danish--I think you
said that the man who called himself Blanc, was really a Dane--eh?"

"Yes.  He told Diamond that he came from Copenhagen," Farquhar replied.

But the old man was too deeply engrossed in the study of the neat
manuscript.  How he wished that the context had been preserved, for
here, he recognised, was the key, or rather the commencement of the key
to the whole secret.  He was now anxious to get rid of Frank Farquhar,
and be allowed to pursue his investigations alone.  There was certainly
much more in it than he had at first suspected.

With such a sensation as that contained in the half-burnt documents to
launch upon the world, he would be acclaimed the most prominent scholar
of the day.  The whole of academic Europe would shower honours upon him.

"What does it mean about the `waw' sign?" inquired the young man.  "Does
that convey anything?"

"Nothing," laughed the Professor with affected indifference.  "What can
one make out of such silly nonsense?  It says, apparently, that in
Ezekiel the `waw' sign appears with great regularity.  Well, so it does
in all Hebrew texts.  The letter `a' appears often in English doesn't
it?  Well, so does the Hebrew `w' or `v'.  Therefore it's all bunkum--
that was my first impression--and I still retain it!"

Gwen looked genuinely disappointed.  She had hoped that this wonderful
manuscript which had fallen into her lover's hands would turn out, as he
had declared it would, to be of utmost value, both to history and also
of financial value to its possessors.

But her father, recognised as one of the first authorities of the day,
had decisively condemned it as a clumsy fraud.

"The reference given in the manuscript is, I see, Ezekiel xli. 23,"
remarked the girl, and turning over the pages of the Bible which she
still held in her hand she exclaimed:

"Here it is.  Let me read it: `And the temple and the sanctuary had two
doors.  And the doors had two leaves _apiece_, two burning leaves; two
_leaves_ for the one door, and two for the other _door_.  And _there
were_ made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubims and palm
trees, like as _were_ made upon the walls; and _there were_ thick planks
upon the face of the porch without.  And _there were_ narrow windows and
palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the
porch, and upon the side chambers of the house, and thick planks.'"

"Yes," remarked the old man.  "The first Hebrew word in the manuscript
means either `palace' or `temple'.  That occurs as the third word of the
quotation.  But there is no mention of `cupbearer'.  If I recollect
aright, there is a mention of the doors of the Temple in the First Book
of Kings.  I believe it's in the sixth chapter.  Look, dear, and see if
you can find it."

His daughter turned over the leaves quickly, found the chapter he had
indicated, and scanned over the verses.

"Ah!" she cried, a moment later.  "Yes.  You are right, dad.  Here it
is, beginning at verse 31: `And for the entering of the oracle he
(Solomon) made doors _of_ olive tree: the lintel _and_ side posts _were_
a fifth part _of the wall_.  The two doors also _were_ of olive tree:
and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open
flowers, and overlaid _them_ with gold, and spread gold upon the
cherubims, and upon the palm trees.  So also made he for the door of the
temple posts _of_ olive tree, a fourth part _of the wall_ And the two
doors _were of_ fir tree: the two leaves of the one door _were_ folding,
and the two leaves of the other door _were_ folding.  And he carved
_thereon_ cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and covered them
with gold fitted upon the carved work.'"

"I looked up the reference in Ezekiel," remarked Frank, "but I could not
understand it.  Perhaps, you, Professor, may be able to throw some light
upon it?"

The old man turned to the speaker, and held up his thin, almost waxen
hands.

"How can I?" he asked with an air of bewilderment well feigned.  "How
can I possibly?  The latter half of this fragment of scribble is a mere
copy of a verse out of the Old Testament, and seems to have nothing
whatever to do with the theory--whatever it may be--expounded in the
upper part of the page."

"Then what is your candid opinion, dad?" asked Gwen, placing her hand
softly upon her father's shoulder again as she stood behind him, and at
the same time turning her eyes affectionately upon the tall,
good-looking, young man at her side.

"My candid opinion, my dear," grunted the old Professor, "is that it is
one of the many extraordinary theories we have had of hare-brained
persons who have gained a smattering of Hebrew, and believe themselves
to have discovered some very wonderful secret.  To put it bluntly,
Gwen--the whole thing is bunkum!"

The young man said nothing.  His spirits fell.  Of course, he had
expected the Professor, in the habit of all scholars, to throw cold
water upon Doctor Diamond's suggestion, but he was hardly prepared for
such a drastic dismissal of the subject.

"Well," he exclaimed at last, "I don't wish you to come to any premature
conclusion, Professor.  You have really not had sufficient opportunity
yet of thoroughly investigating the affair, have you?"

"No.  That's quite true.  I--well--I'd like to keep these scraps for a
day, or say a couple of days--if I might, my dear Frank.  I'll be most
careful of them, I promise you, and they shall not leave my possession.
As a matter of fact," he added, "Ginsberg from Berlin happens to be in
London, and I'm extremely anxious to show them to him, and hear his
views."

Frank Farquhar was a smart young man, and in a second realised danger in
this.

"I fear, Professor, that I cannot allow you to show them to Professor
Ginsberg.  I made a promise to Diamond that they should be shown only to
yourself."

"Very well, very well," laughed the Professor, "if you care to trust
them with me till the day after to-morrow I will promise to show them to
nobody.  I only wish to study the extraordinary statement myself, and
consult certain original Hebrew texts."

At first Frank was reluctant, remembering his promise to Doctor Diamond.
But at Gwen's persuasion he was induced to leave them to be locked up
in the old-fashioned oak bureau at the further end of the cosy room.
The three then passed into the small drawing-room on the same floor,
where Gwen, at her lover's request, sat at the piano and sang in her
sweet contralto several pretty French _chansonettes_ which she had
learnt.

CHAPTER EIGHT.

PRESENTS ANOTHER CURIOUS PROBLEM.

In the solution of a problem such as that placed before Professor
Griffin, knowledge meant power.

Though he had successfully concealed his excitement he had, truth to
tell, learnt much from the perusal of those charred papers--much that
held him in utter amazement.  A theory had presented itself of which no
one had ever before dreamed.

He had derided the manuscript as a clumsy story by some half-educated
person.  But, within himself, he knew quite well that the problem had
been propounded and the suggestion made by some person equally well-read
as himself, some Hebrew scholar of highest attainment, if not of highest
standing.  Alas, in these days of impudent self-advertisement, it is not
the cleverest man who is the most notable, or who looms largest in the
public eye.  The same rule applies to Professors of Hebrew, as to men in
every other walk of life.

That night, after Frank had left and Gwen had kissed him good-night and
gone to her room, he sat for over an hour, smoking his long pipe in
silence at his study fireside.  He had resolved that he would be the
first to reveal the startling secret to the world.  Yes.  He would write
an article in the _Contemporary_, and he knew full well that words,
coming from such a high authority as himself, would be quoted by almost
every newspaper in the whole civilised globe.

It was astounding--never before in the whole history of the world had
such a wonderful discovery been made.  The Christian religion would be
shaken to its very foundations--not weakened, be it said, but actually
strengthened a thousandfold.

He laughed aloud as he sat with his pipe in his hand, his eyes cast down
upon the bright red hearthrug.

"What would the Bishops of the Anglican Church, the Cardinals of the
Romish Church, the Rabbis of the Jewish Synagogues and all the other
heads of our religion give for possession of this secret which is mine--
mine only!" he exclaimed, speaking to himself in a low whisper.  "What
would men in the city, the financiers, speculators, and the
thousand-and-one varieties of money `sharks' give me to reveal the truth
to them.  The truth?" he repeated thoughtfully.  "The truth?  No.  I
have not yet got at the actual truth.  To discover it will be my work
to-morrow.  And I will not pause for a single instant until all is
plain, and I have the secret open and revealed."

Again he hesitated, smoking on in silence, his brow heavy and
thoughtful, for he had taken off his glasses and placed them in their
big, bulky case.

"Two men, this fellow Diamond, whoever he may be, and Frank Farquhar
stand between myself and the secret!" he muttered to himself with a
grin.  Then he rose impatiently and snapped his fingers.  "They shall
not stand in my way for long," he laughed.  "The secret is mine--it is
in _my_ possession!"

The Professor rose early next day, as was his habit.

As he sat at the breakfast table, Gwen who looked bright and fresh in
her neat white blouse and plain navy serge skirt, noticed that he was
unusually silent and morose.  They were devoted to each other, but at
such times when her father, rendered irritable by his studies, betrayed
impatience she always remained silent.

"I've asked Frank over to luncheon, dad," she ventured at last to
remark.

Whereupon the old man replied in a snappy voice: "I fear I shall not be
bade.  I'm going along to the Museum, and may be there all day.  I have
a number of researches to make.  Apologise for my absence."

Gwen promised to do this; but instead, an hour later, she sent her lover
a wire, suggesting that, as the Professor would be absent, they should
lunch together at Princes', which idea the young man gladly adopted.

At eleven Professor Griffin, descending from a cab, entered a small
office in Oxford Street, the office of a firm of photographers whose
specialty is the reproducing of ancient documents for the official
publications of the British Museum, the Paleographical Society and
similar institutions.  To the manager, he produced the carefully
preserved scraps of typewriting and manuscript, and ordered photographic
reproductions to be made with as great a speed as possible.

The manager examined the charred folios closely, and declared that the
work would be useless for reproduction in any journal or magazine.

"I don't want them for that purpose," was Griffin's reply.

"We'll do them as clearly as possible on whole plates, Professor," was
the man's reply, "but they will not come out very satisfactorily, I
fear."

"As long as I can decipher them easily is all I care," replied the older
man.  "I shall call for the originals at four o'clock."

"We will have finished with them by that time, sir.  I will send them
down to the studio at Acton."

"And take the utmost care of them please," urged the Professor.

"We are used, as you know, sir, to handling the most valuable
manuscripts in the world.  The Museum give us all their work, and we
often have, in our safes, manuscripts worth thousands of pounds each,"
replied the manager.

A sudden thought occurred to Griffin, and taking from the table the
scrap of writing upon the ruled paper, he held it up to the light to
examine its watermark.  The design was at once apparent--the head of a
lady of the seventeenth century with hair dressed in the style of
Charles the First, low-cut bodice, puffed sleeves, and a necklet of
pearls, while above the words placed in a semi-circle was "Sevigne
Paper."

"H'm," grunted the old man, "evidently one of those imitation English
papers, made in France.  Well, Macdonald, get as good results as you can
from the scraps, won't you?"

The photographer's manager, who knew Griffin well, and who had often
photographed Hebrew and Greek manuscripts for him, assured him that the
very greatest care should be taken in the work.

Thereupon, the Professor rose and left, urging that the originals should
be returned from Acton well before four o'clock.

In his thick and somewhat shabby overcoat and soft felt hat, he walked
through the drizzling rain to the British Museum, where, as he entered,
the attendants saluted him.  In that national institution he was a
well-known figure, for during the greater part of his lifetime he had
studied there, especially in the Department of Manuscripts.

It was to that he at once made his way.  The Keeper of the Department
was absent, but a man of Professor Griffin's reputation has the "run of
the place;" therefore after wishing good-day to one of the
assistant-keepers he began searching the catalogue of manuscripts for
the Hebrew ones which he wished to consult, writing their numbers upon a
slip.  This he handed to the assistant-keeper who, having glanced at the
numbers and recognised to which they referred, regarded him with a
glance of quick curiosity.

"One of the earliest originals of the Book of Ezekiel--eh, Professor?"
remarked the man.  "And the other is the Muratori Manuscript."

"Exactly," was Griffin's reply, and when the man had left the little
room in which he was standing, he drew from his pocket a small book in
which overnight he had made pencilled memoranda from the half-confused
fragments which Frank had placed before him.  Then he waited in
undisguised anxiety.

Presently the assistant-keeper returned with two of the most important
Biblical manuscripts the Museum possessed, and placed them before the
man whose opinion upon Hebrew originals of Holy Writ was always
decisive.

The first manuscript, one of the earliest originals of the Book of
Ezekiel and one used by the revisers of the Bible a few years ago, was
upon yellow and discoloured parchment of great age, bound in old calf of
the early sixteenth century.  The binding had practically perished, but
the writing within was still plain and quite decipherable to an expert.

Originally written upon a long roll, it had in later times been cut into
folios and bound, as being readier of access, and easier to consult.  Of
its early history from the time of being written until A.D. 1421,
practically nothing was known.  In the year in question it was brought
to Constantinople from Palestine, and in 1627 was given by the Patriarch
to Charles the First.

The Professor removed his hat and overcoat seated himself, and with
reverent fingers turned the time-dimmed pages from which a portion of
our Holy Bible had been translated.

To the person unacquainted with early Hebrew script the pages were
covered by meaningless hieroglyphics; but to him they were as clear as
any printed column in the _Times_ newspaper.

He searched through until he discovered a certain passage.  Then,
eagerly consulting his notebook, he began translating it, word for word,
writing down the English equivalent upon the paper that had been placed
before him.

He did not hurry, but alone in the little room, he worked on, slowly and
deliberately.  For fully two hours he continued but the result was,
judging from the expression upon his face, by no means gratifying.

The assistant-keeper came and went, for the Professor, being such a
great authority, was always allowed to work in the keeper's private
room.  Indeed only a man of Griffin's rare attainments and knowledge
would have been able to translate from the original Hebrew of that
ancient character, so often indistinct and involved in meaning and in
sense.

At times, with a rapid hand, he made an exact reproduction of the
original, especially that of chapter xli, verse 23 to the end which, as
will be recollected, was given in the dead man's manuscript as an
illustration.

Heedless of the fact that he had had no luncheon, he continued copying
the original very carefully and with a sure and expert touch until he
had made a complete copy of the original of chapters xl, xli, xlii,
xliv, and xlvii, a work which occupied him till nearly four o'clock.

He took no count of time, so wholly engrossed was he in his work.  The
assistant-keeper entered prior to his departure at four o'clock when the
department closed, and began bustling about, hoping that the
"dry-as-dust" old fellow, being disturbed, might abandon his work for
that day.

But nothing interrupted him in making his rapid copying of those Hebrew
characters that had been written before the birth of Christ.

Presently, in sheer despair, the assistant-keeper remarked:

"That's rather heavy work for you, Professor, isn't it?"

"No.  Not exactly," was the old man's quick reply without looking up, "I
am about to make a most interesting investigation; therefore, I dare not
employ any copyist.  He might so easily make mistakes."

"An investigation!" echoed the younger man.  "Why, curiously enough for
the past three days we've had a man here copying that same book for some
mysterious purpose.  He finished only yesterday afternoon.  But he
refused to tell me the reason he was making the copy other than that he,
like yourself, was making some investigations.  He used the same
expression as yourself, curiously enough."

"Another searcher!" gasped the Professor, laying down his pen, and
staring at the speaker.  "Another investigator of the original of the
Book of Ezekiel!  Who was he?  What was he like?" demanded the old man
quickly, his face blanched in an instant.

"I don't know who he was, for we've never seen him here before.  He was
an old gentleman, a foreigner evidently--and a scholar, for he wrote the
Hebrew characters almost as quickly and accurately as you yourself."

Professor Arminger Griffin sat back in his chair, his mouth open,
staring into space.

Was it possible that some one else besides himself had obtained
knowledge of the great secret, and was actively engaged upon
investigations!

And the stranger who had copied that very manuscript which he was
copying, was an unknown foreigner and a scholar into the bargain!

Was it possible that the secret was already out?

CHAPTER NINE.

CONCERNS "THE OTHER MAN."

"What was the stranger like?" asked the Professor eagerly, his thin hand
resting upon the ancient parchment he had been so carefully copying.

"A short, stout, elderly man with white pointed beard," was the
assistant-keeper's reply.  "Four days ago he came here, carrying with
him a number of references which he turned up in various early Hebrew
manuscripts.  But it was the one you have there before you which
attracted him most.  He worked three days upon it, and made a complete
and most accurate copy."

"He didn't tell you whence he came, or for what purpose he was making
the researches?"

"No, for, as you well know, Professor, students seldom do.  They are not
very communicative, unless they be young," laughed the official.  "But
he was a foreigner."

"Undoubtedly.  From the north of Europe, I should say--Norwegian or
perhaps Russian, not German, I think.  But he spoke most excellent
English."

"A scholar?"

"Without a doubt.  He went about his work in that careful methodical
manner that at once betrayed the specialist.  He concluded his work only
yesterday."

"How was he dressed?"

"Fairly well.  He wore a dark-grey suit and a black bow cravat."

"His searches were confined to Ezekiel?"

"No, not exactly.  He copied some references from our earliest
manuscript of Deuteronomy--you examined it a few months ago, I remember.
The thirty-second chapter seemed to attract him, as he copied it in its
entirety."

"Ah, that's the Song of Moses," remarked the Professor.  "`Give ear O ye
heavens, and I will speak; and hear O earth, the words of my mouth.'  I
wonder what can be his object," he added thoughtfully.

"He merely told me that he was making an investigation in order to put a
remarkable theory to the test."

Griffin started.  A remarkable theory was being put to the test by this
stranger!  Was it possible that another scholar was in possession of the
dead man's secret, besides himself!

He held his breath.  Then, when a few moments later he had recovered
himself, he began to make many inquiries concerning the unknown
foreigner.  But it was already past four o'clock, and the
assistant-keeper had his train to catch to his home at Epping.
Therefore he declared that he knew no more, and taking the precious
manuscript, replaced it with the others and hastily bade the Professor
"Good afternoon."

"Good afternoon," was the old man's reply.  "I am sorry you are in such
a hurry.  I'll return to-morrow."

Then he struggled into his overcoat, and left the Museum full of vague
misgivings.

Already dark outside, the street-lamps were lit, and the steady downpour
was unceasing.  But he trudged across to the photographer's, and there
obtained the scraps of half-destroyed manuscript, which only a few
moments before had been brought back from the studio at Acton.

"We shall have prints ready for you to-morrow evening," said the
manager.  "I'll send them to you, shall I?"

"No, don't do that," Griffin said quickly.  "I would rather call for
them.  I'll be in about this time to-morrow."

Then placing the packet in his pocket, he walked along Oxford Street in
the direction of Tottenham Court Road.

His mind was full of the alarming discovery that another person was
investigating the same problem as himself.  This meant that the secret
was known, and if known to another, what more likely than that the
stranger possessed a complete manuscript--a manuscript which gave the
context, not only of the curious statement, but of the directions of how
the truth could be verified.

Of the latter, he possessed only that one scrap of written manuscript.
There must have been other folios, but all were, alas! missing.  They
had, no doubt, been consumed by the flames before the eyes of the dying
man.

He was beside himself with anxiety.  It could not have been Diamond
himself who had been at the Museum, for the Doctor was not a Hebrew
scholar and, besides, he had been told by Frank that the man was badly
deformed.  Therefore, his deformity would certainly have impressed
itself upon the assistant-keeper.

By the "Tube" from Tottenham Court Road Station he travelled to Notting
Hill Gate, and turning into Pembridge Gardens, let himself in with his
latch-key.

Frank was with Gwen in the drawing-room, and they were taking their tea
_tete-a-tete_ when the old man entered.  After luncheon he had taken her
to a matinee, and the happy pair had only just returned.

"Tell me, Frank," asked the Professor, almost before he had time to
greet him, "did that friend of yours, Diamond, show those papers to any
one else besides you, do you think?"

"Certainly not.  Why?" inquired the young man in some surprise.

"Oh, nothing," replied the Professor with slight hesitation.  "I--well--
I only thought that it would be a little unfair to trouble me if
somebody else had already been making any researches."

"Nobody has seen it save myself, I can assure you.  Diamond is a most
careful and cautious man," Frank declared.  "He brought them straight
over from Paris, and came at once to me."

"He might possibly have shown them to somebody in Paris," the elder man
suggested.

"I asked him, and he distinctly told me that nobody save myself had set
eyes upon them."

The Professor sank into an armchair, and in silence took the cup of tea
which Gwen handed to him.

"You're tired, dad," she said.  "I see it in your face!"

"A little, dear.  I've been at the Museum all day."

"I wish you wouldn't go to that horrid old place.  It always gives you a
headache, you know," said the girl anxiously.

"Ah, my child," replied the old man with a sigh, "the place holds, for
me, much that is interesting in life--in fact all that is interesting,
except your own neat little self."

The girl laughed merrily, declaring that compliments should not be paid
to her in the presence of Frank.

But the old man, sighing rather wearily, said:

"Well, Gwen, it's the truth.  I have nothing much to live for, except
yourself and my studies.  When your dear mother died, the sun of my life
was extinguished.  And now you have grown up to take her place."

She and Frank exchanged quick meaning glances.

"I hope always to live near you, dear old dad, even after we're
married," she said.  "I shall never desert you."

Her father smiled, saying:

"That is what every girl says to her parents before marriage.  Few,
however, fulfil their promise."

"Well, dad, don't let's talk about parting till the time really comes,"
exclaimed his daughter, in an endeavour to change the topic of
conversation.  Only a moment prior to the Professor's return she and
Frank had been discussing the future, and considering that very point.

"Have you been making researches in the Museum in connection with the
burnt papers, Professor?" asked young Farquhar, who, standing in his
well-cut suit of blue serge, looked a splendid specimen of the lithe,
athletic young Englishman.

"Yes, I have."

"And the result?"

The Professor shook his head in the negative.

"At present I have failed to discover the slightest title of
corroboration of your friend Doctor Diamond's wonderful theory.  The
construction which may be placed upon the scrappy statements are many,
but none upon which I can yet form any absolute conclusion."

He made no mention that he had caused photographic negatives of the
burnt papers to be secured, or that, within his pocket, there reposed an
accurate copy of the accepted original of the Book of Ezekiel.

"You are still in opposition, then, to Diamond's theory?" asked the
young man.

"Of course."

"But why?"

The Professor drank his tea slowly, and replaced the cup upon the little
table.

"Well," he answered with much deliberation, "because Biblical history is
entirely opposed to it.  The first Book of Kings relates in detail the
building of the temple by Solomon in B.C. 1012, the dimensions of the
Porch, the Holy Place, and the Holy of Holies.  Within and without the
building was conspicuous by the lavish use of gold from Ophir and
Parvaim.  Above the sacred Ark, which was placed as of old in the Most
Holy Place, were made new cherubim, one pair of whose wings met above
the Ark and another pair reached to the walls behind them.  In the Holy
Place, besides the Altar of Incense, which was made of cedar overlaid
with gold, there were seven golden candlesticks instead of one, and the
table of the shew-bread was replaced by ten golden tables bearing beside
the shew-bread the innumerable golden vessels for the service of the
sanctuary.  Instead of the brazen laver we know that there was a `molten
sea' of brass, a masterpiece of Hiram's skill, for the ablutions of the
priests.  It was called a `sea' from its great size, being five cubits
in height ten in diameter and thirty in circumference, and containing,
it is estimated, about sixteen thousand gallons of water.  It stood upon
twelve oxen, three towards each quarter of the heavens, and all looking
outwards.  The brim itself, or lip, was wrought `like the brim of a cup,
with flowers of lilies,' or curved outwards like a lily or lotus flower.
The front of the porch was supported, after the manner of some Egyptian
temples, by the two great brazen pillars Jachin and Boaz, eighteen
cubits high, with capitols of five cubits more, adorned, as we are told,
with lily-work and pomegranates.

"But," he added, "all this is historical fact.  In the temple reposed
the most valuable collection of gold and jewels ever gathered together,
and the dedication of the House of Jehovah, the God of Israel, was the
grandest ceremony ever performed under the Mosaic dispensation.  And if
you read 1 Kings, viii, and 2 Chronicles, v, you will there learn how,
at the ceremony, Jehovah gave the sign of His coming to take possession
of His house.  Then Solomon built his own house, placing within it the
wonderful `wealth of Ormuz and Ind,' and to him came the Queen of Sheba,
an event which marked the culminating-point of his glory.  The very king
who built the glorious temple, and to whom Jehovah had twice given
solemn warning in his old age, however, and under the influence of his
wives, turned his heart away from God.  He served Ashtoreth, the
moon-goddess of the Zidonians, and Moloch, the `horrid king' whom the
Ammonites worshipped with human sacrifice.  Solomon died in B.C. 976,
and very shortly after his death the prophecy of Ahijah was fulfilled:
his kingdom was rent in twain, and the parts, weakened by the
disruption, formed the separate kingdoms of Judah and of Israel."

"It will be interesting to trace the history of the temple from that
date down to the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar," remarked Frank.

"That occurred about three hundred years after Solomon's death--at least
according to our latest chronologers," replied the Professor, "and it is
in tracing that history that we have many of the points before us
negatived most decisively.  Let me instance one or two of them."

"Yes, do, dad," cried Gwen, greatly interested.  "I'm quite excited,
over the mysterious affair."

"Then listen, child," the old man said.  "But, first go and get a Bible
from the study."

And the girl rose to do her father's bidding.

CHAPTER TEN.

FACT OR FICTION.

"I may perhaps with advantage give you very roughly some historical
facts which tend to negative Diamond's theory," the Professor said,
turning to Farquhar while Gwen was absent.

"That is what I'm most desirous of hearing," replied the young man.  "I
can claim no special knowledge like yourself.  Indeed, no man in England
is more capable of expressing an opinion than you are."

The Professor passed his hand through his scanty grey hair and smiled.
He saw that his wide knowledge impressed this young man whose only
thought was a "sensation" in one or other of the Gavin group of
publications.

Then, when Gwen had re-entered the room with a Bible in her hand, he
said in that slow, deliberate habit of his, the habit of the scholar and
deep thinker:

"The theory of this Doctor Diamond is that the treasures of Solomon's
temple were hidden by the priests prior to the taking of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar.  Well, that is a bold but quite unsubstantiated
assertion.  As early after Solomon as the reign of Jeroboam the First,
King of Judah, the golden calves, the symbols of the Heliopolitan deity,
were set up in the two extremities of the kingdom, and the temple was
put to sacrilegious usages.  These sins were continued by his
successors, until in the reign of Asa, the third King of Judah, the
impure orgies of Ashtoreth were suppressed, for `having his heart
perfect with Jehovah all his days' the king repaired Shishak's plunder--
the first plunder of the temple, mark you--with `rich offerings of gold
and of silver.'  Asa made war against the Ethiopians, and on returning
to Jerusalem the prophet Azariah, son of Oded, met him and exhorted him
and his subjects to be strong heart in hand in seeking God.  He gave an
affecting description of the former state of Israel: `For a long season
Israel hath been (or was) without the true God, and without a teaching'
priest, and without law.  [2 Chronicles, xv, 3.]  His words roused the
hearers to a new and more thorough reformation.  The idols were removed
from all the cities of Judah and Benjamin, and those which had been won
from Ephraim.  The altar of burnt-offering, which had been polluted by
Jeroboam, was renewed, and in the third month of the fifteenth year
(B.C. 940) Asa called a great convocation at Jerusalem.  Jehoshaphat
followed his father's piety, but the darkest night of Israel's spiritual
declension came with the accession of Ahab, seventh King of Israel, and
husband of Jezebel.  The service of Baal was established throughout
Israel, a grove was made for the orgies of Ashtoreth, and by Jezebel's
orders the prophets of Jehovah were put to death, all except one hundred
who were hidden in a cave by Obadiah, the governor of Ahab's house."

"But was the temple already plundered?" asked Gwen, seated with her chin
resting upon her hand, listening intently.

"We know that it was plundered seriously by Shishak, King of Egypt, who
carried off many of its greatest treasures, including the celebrated
golden shields of Solomon's house, which Rehoboam replaced by brass to
keep up the display," was the Professor's prompt reply.  "Recent
discoveries at Karnak tell the whole story of the conquest from the
Egyptian point of view.  The kingdom of Judah, it seems, became for a
long time tributary to Shishak, and upon the walls of the great temple
at Karnak there are the sculptured representation of the siege and the
hieroglyphics `Fuda Melchi'--meaning `The Kingdom of Judah.'  That was,
you will bear in mind, the first spoliation."

"Were there others?" asked Frank.  "I mean others that are authenticated
by recent discoveries?"

"Yes, Jehoram reigned in Jerusalem from B.C. 895-892, and after his
marriage with Athaliah, daughter of Ahab, the temple was again
despoiled, and the daughters of Judah were once more prostituted to the
rites of Ashtoreth," replied Professor Griffin.  "Joash, in B.C. 884,
repaired the fabric of the temple by public subscription, for he was the
inventor of the modern money-box--and there were enough funds left over,
we are told, to purchase vessels for the sanctuary.  [2 Kings, xii, 4-6;
2 Chronicles, xxiv, 4-14.]  This, however, did not last long, for in the
reign of Amaziah, ninth King of Judah, Jehoash, King of Israel, defeated
him in B.C. 826, took him prisoner and, entering Jerusalem again,
reached the temple and conveyed all its treasures to Samaria.

"In the reigns of Jeroboam the Second, Shallam, Menaham and Pekehiah,
other vessels and treasures were provided for the temple.  Jonathan
built the high gate, but his successor, Ahaz, after plunging into all
the idolatries of the surrounding nations, making molten images for Baal
and sacrificing his children to Moloch in the valley of Hinnom, found
himself, according to our best chronologer, Ussher, involved in war.  He
was therefore compelled to apply for help to Tiglath-pileser, the
`Tiger-Lord of Asshur,' King of Assyria, against Syria and Israel, and
declaring himself his vassal, sent him all the treasures then left in
the temple.  Ahaz, we learn from 2 Kings, xvi, 10-18, profaned the
temple by dismounting the brazen altar and replacing it by another.
Likewise the `Great Sea of Solomon,' too large to be removed at previous
despoliations, was dismounted from its supporting oxen, and the lavers
from their bases, which were also sent to the King of Assyria, together
with the coverings which had been built for the King's entry to the
house, and for the shelter of the worshippers on the Sabbath.  The
golden vessels of the House of God were cut in pieces and sent with the
rest, and the sanctuary itself was shut up.  Hezekiah, who came after
him in B.C. 726, reopened and restored the Holy Place, though it was now
devoid of most of its treasures.

"To trace the history of the Temple through the days of Hoshea, son of
Elah, Manasseh and Amon is perhaps unnecessary.  Under Josiah, whose
reign marks the last dying glory of the earthly kingdom of David,
idolatry was put away, the Temple was renovated and the Ark of the
Covenant which had been hidden restored to its place.  [2 Chronicles,
xxxiv, 3-13; xxxv, 3.]  During these repairs the high priest Hilkiah
found the sacred copy of the book of the law and delivered it to
Shaphan, the scribe, who read it before the king.  It was afterwards
publicly read, and incited a new zeal among the people, and once again
was the sanctuary filled with gold and silver vessels.  Therefore you
will see that by this period there could not have been any of the actual
treasures placed by Solomon remaining in the Temple."

"The Ark of the Covenant was still there," remarked young Farquhar.

"That is not at all certain," was the old man's reply.  "Many of the
events chronicled in the Old Testament are corroborated by the
inscriptions found by Flinders Petrie in Egypt and by Layard at Nineveh.
Others are negatived, and our chronology rendered uncertain.  Certain
it is, however," he went on, "that in the fourth year of the reign of
Jehoiakim, eighteenth King of Judah (B.C. 608-597), Nebuchadnezzar
arose, and a few years later advanced to Jerusalem, which he took after
a brief siege.  The vessels of the sanctuary were carried off to
Babylon, where they were dedicated in the temple of Belus.  If you turn
to 2 Kings, xxiv, 13, you will there read: `And he carried out thence
all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the
king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon,
King of Israel had made in the temple of the Lord, as the Lord had
said.'"

"Surely it was Ezekiel who went as one of the prisoners of
Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon," remarked Gwen.

"Yes," replied her father, "on the second occasion when the Babylonian
king attacked the city.  But," he added, "in the reference I have just
given you, you will note that the vessels are described as `those that
Solomon had made.'  Either therefore they had been too massive for
removal on the many previous occasions when the temple was plundered or
they had been made to replace the ancient originals.  The latter is my
own theory.  Now, as I dare say you will recollect, in B.C. 586, on the
tenth day of the fifth month, Ab, Nebuchadnezzar again advanced against
the rebellious city of Jerusalem and destroyed it.  The two great
pillars of the temple porch, Jachin and Boaz, and Solomon's brazen sea
with the twelve bulls supporting it, were broken in pieces and their
brass transported to Babylon, together with a great number of captives.
And on the third day of the catastrophe, in the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, the temple and the city were committed to the flames
with the palaces of the king and princes, and all the chief houses of
Jerusalem, and their walls levelled to the ground."

"Then that was the actual end of Solomon's temple," remarked Frank
Farquhar.  "Is that authentic?"

"Without a doubt," said the Professor.  "Yet did not Jeremiah comfort
the Jews amid all these judgments by contrasting His destruction of the
other nations of their present oppressors with His correction of
themselves?  `Fear thou not, O Jacob, my servant, saith Jehovah, for I
am with thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I
have driven thee; _but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct
thee in measure_; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.'  Surely
no words could more fully express the principle of Jehovah's dealings
with the Jews, His own people, in every age."

"Belshazzar, at his feast in Babylon, put to sacrilegious uses the
vessels of the temple, did he not?" asked the young man.

"Yes," answered Griffin, and addressing Gwen said: "Turn to the fifth
chapter of Daniel, dear, and read out the first four verses."

The girl found the place and read as follows: "Belshazzar, the King,
made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the
thousand.  Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the
golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out
of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the King and his princes, his
wives and his concubines, might drink therein.  Then they brought the
golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God
which was at Jerusalem; and the King, and his princes, his wives, and
his concubines, drank in them.  They drank wine and praised the gods of
gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone."

"And at that moment," remarked the Professor, "was seen the prophetic
handwriting on the wall: `_Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin_,' being followed
by the city's surprise by Cyrus the Great, and its fall and destruction.
Then under Cyrus, the Israelites returned from their captivity, and by
his decree another temple was built by Zerubbabel, the prince of Judah,
who was leader of the migration.  Cyrus caused his treasurer Mithredath
to deliver up the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from
Jerusalem, five thousand four hundred in number, to Zerubbabel to be
re-consecrated to the service of Jehovah."

"Is it to this second temple which our manuscript relates, do you
think?" queried Frank.  "Or is it to Solomon's temple?"

"Of the temple of Zerubbabel we have but few particulars," answered the
Professor, "and no description that would enable us to realise its
appearance.  But there are some dimensions given in the Bible and
elsewhere which are extremely interesting as affording points of
comparison between it and the temple of Solomon and Herod after it.  The
first and most authentic are those given in the Book of Ezra [Ezra vi,
3-4] when quoting the decree of Cyrus, wherein it is said: `Let the
house be builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the
foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof three-score
cubits, and the breadth thereof three-score cubits, with three rows of
great stones and a row of new timber.'  Josephus quotes this passage
almost literally, but in doing so enables us with certainty to translate
the word here called `row' as storey, as indeed the sense would lead us
to infer--for it could apply only to the three storeys of chambers that
surrounded Solomon's, and afterwards Herod's temple, and with this again
we come to the wooden talar which surmounted the temple and formed a
fourth storey.  It may be remarked that this dimension of sixty cubits
in height accords perfectly with the words which Josephus puts into the
mouth of Herod when he makes him say that the temple built after the
Captivity wanted sixty cubits of the height of that of Solomon.  For as
he had adopted the height of a hundred and twenty cubits in the
Chronicles for that temple, this one remained only sixty.  This temple
was still standing in Herod's time, and was repaired by him.  Hecataeus
mentions that the altar was twenty cubits square and ten high.  But he
unfortunately does not supply us with the dimensions of the temple
itself.  Therefore if the priests and Levites and Elders of families
were disconsolate at seeing how much more sumptuous the old temple was
than the one which on account of their poverty they had just been able
to erect, [Ezra, iii, 12-13; Joseph Ast., xi, 4, 2] it certainly was not
because it was smaller, as almost every dimension had been increased
one-third; but it may have been that the carving and the gold and other
ornaments of Solomon's temple far surpassed this, and the pillars of the
portico and the veils may all have been far more splendid, so also
probably were the vessels; and all this is what a Jew would mourn over,
far more than mere architectural splendour."

"It is a pity we do not know more about this second temple," remarked
Gwen, in a tone of disappointment and regret.

"For our present purpose its history, down to the taking of Jerusalem by
Titus, does not concern us, my dear," remarked the old scholar, drawing
his hand rather wearily over his white brow.  "The problem before us
evidently has to do with the days of Jehoiakim, prior to the advance of
Nebuchadnezzar.  Later facts and traditions do not concern us at the
moment.  I think, however, I have given you an outline of the varied
history of the temple and its treasures based upon the very latest
readings of Egyptian, Assyrian and other inscriptions, sufficient to
show you quite plainly that Solomon's treasure could not possibly have
existed in the reign of Jehoiakim, and that the theory of this friend of
yours, Diamond, is utterly and entirely without the foundation of
tradition or of ancient legend."

"Well," remarked the young man, "such an opinion coming from your mouth
is, of course, final, Professor.  Yet you must admit that the statement,
even as it stands, is full of interest."

"Full of very cleverly conceived mystery--and mystery is always
attractive," laughed the Professor, looking at him through his big,
round, highly magnifying spectacles.

In the statement he had made there was one discrepancy, one that only a
scholar would notice.  He had purposely withheld one Biblical
reference--one which, above all, had caused him to reflect and believe
that the writer of the half-burnt screed was correct, that the secret
and its key were actually genuine.

But it was his fixed intention to turn Frank Farquhar from further
investigation, and to laugh at Doctor Diamond as a fool, ignorant of any
knowledge of the history of the Hebrew race.

A silence fell.  Gwen Griffin and her lover were both staring straight
at the fire without uttering a word.

The old man sat watching the effect of his words upon the pair, and
before Frank left, he handed back to him the charred remnants which he
had received from the photographer.

But his thoughts were of that other man--the short, white-bearded
foreigner, his rival--who was so busy with his researches, the stranger
from across the Channel who also held the remarkable secret.

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE GREAT GOD GOLD.

After dining at the club Frank Farquhar strolled round to Half Moon
Street, and throwing himself into an armchair before the fire, gave
himself up to reflection.

He was recalling what the Professor had said.  It was true that all
stories of lost treasure were nowadays received with incredulity, and
surely this was the most amazing and most wonderful of them all.

Arminger Griffin, Regius Professor of Hebrew, treated the whole matter
as a huge joke.  Historical fact was wholly against the suggestion
contained in these half-burned scraps which, before his departure from
Pembridge Gardens, the Professor had handed back to him.  Ah! if they
could only reconstruct the context of those disjoined words.

He took a cigar and lit it.  But a moment later he tossed it impatiently
into the fire.  It tasted bitter.  The Professor had dashed all his
hopes to the ground, for was not his opinion on such a matter final.

As he bade good-night to Gwen in the hall and held her soft hand in his
she had whispered to him words of encouragement.  "Father is really
devoid of any romance," she declared.  "There may be something in the
secret after all.  Could you not endeavour to find the person who made
that remarkable declaration?"

Her suggestion he was now carefully considering.

The stranger who had died in Paris was apparently not the person who
made the declaration.  The latter was in all probability alive.  If so,
could he not furnish many more facts than the scrappy information they
at present possessed?

Yet what right had Doctor Diamond to the secret--and for the matter of
that, what right had he himself?

That the hard-up stranger in Paris feared lest the documents should fall
into other hands was shown by his last act of causing them to be burned.
Such a course made it appear as though the stranger had no right to the
possession of the papers.  In all probability he had not!

Gwen's suggestion, however, appealed to him.  Yet to find that one man
in the whole world who knew the truth would, he foresaw, be a work
fraught with greatest difficulty.  The only manner by which he could be
approached, if found, would be upon pretence of restoring to him the
charred remains of his valuable statement.

The telephone-bell rang, and he rose and answered it.  The editor of one
of the great daily journals controlled by his brother-in-law, Sir
George, spoke from the office in Fleet Street, at that hour of the
evening a hive of industry.  A question of policy had arisen, and the
editor, one of the shining lights of modern journalism, consulted Frank
as representative of the proprietor, Sir George being still in Egypt.

Frank, after a brief conversation, left the matter entirely in the
editor's hands, and replacing the receiver walked back from the big
roll-top writing-table to the fireplace, where he stood with both arms
leaning on the mantelshelf gazing thoughtfully into the blazing coals.

A few moments later his man entered saying:

"A gentleman to see you, sir--Doctor Diamond."

Frank started.  His visitor was the very man of all men he wished most
to consult, therefore he gave orders for him to be shown in at once.

"Why, my dear Doctor," cried the young fellow, as the ugly little old
man entered, "this is a real surprise!  I thought of running down to
Horsford to see you in the morning.  Take off your coat and sit down.  I
want to have a serious chat with you."

"I got no reply to my two letters, Mr Farquhar," said the crook-backed
little man in explanation of his visit.  "So I thought I'd just run up
and see how you are progressing with our business."

Frank helped him off with his shabby frieze coat and, having installed
him comfortably by the fire and given him a cigar, replied:

"Well, Doctor, the fact is I did not reply to your letters because I had
nothing definite to report.  I trust you will not attribute my silence
to any want of courtesy.  I have been busy over the matter ever since I
returned to London."

"And with what result?" asked the crafty-eyed little man.

"Nothing very satisfactory, I regret to say," was the young man's
answer.  "Yet I am not discouraged.  Professor Griffin, before whom I
have placed it, gives as his opinion that there is probably, something
in the theory, but he will not quite commit himself to any absolute
declaration."

"Is he really competent to judge?"  Diamond queried.

"Competent!  Why, my dear sir, he's one of the first Hebrew scholars in
the world!  He is daily engaged in making researches.  History, as we
are acquainted with it, may negative the theory advanced in those scraps
of typewriting, yet Old Testament history is, as you know, very involved
and often very contradictory."

"Well," exclaimed the Doctor, "to tell the truth, Mr Farquhar, I'm
getting anxious.  What I fear is that too many people will get knowledge
of it.  Then, with the secret out, we shall have others trying to
investigate.  And with such a gigantic business before us, is it any
wonder that I'm becoming impatient?"

"Many a good business is spoilt by being in too great a hurry," Frank
declared.  "Remain patient, and leave matters entirely to me," he added
reflectively.  "I've been wondering whether, if we made diligent and
secret inquiry, we might not discover the actual person, whoever he may
be, who made the curious declaration.  It certainly was not your dead
friend."

The Doctor hesitated.  The idea at once commended itself to him.

"No," he said.  "Often when I have recalled all the romantic facts, I
have been inclined to suspect that the man who died, although a scholar,
had no right to possession of those papers.  He intended to make money
with them if death had not come so unexpectedly.  His very words proved
that."

"Exactly my opinion," declared Frank.  "Now if we could but find out who
the mysterious discoverer really is, we might approach him under
pretence of handing back to him the remains of the papers."

"Ah!  You still have them safely, eh?" demanded the Doctor.

"Certainly.  They are locked in from prying eyes in my desk yonder."

"May I have them?"

"Of course," was Frank's unhesitating reply, though he had no desire to
part with them at that juncture.  Yet he had, unfortunately, no excuse
for keeping them further.  He could not say that the Professor held
them, as he had given his visitor a solemn promise not to allow the
documents out of his possession.

So he rose, unlocked a drawer with the key upon his chain, and handed to
the deformed man the packet containing the half-burnt statement.

"Well," remarked Diamond, as he took the precious documents in his hand,
"if you think it a wise course, let us adopt it."

"Yes, but where are we to commence our search?"

"The stranger said he was a Dane.  He came from Copenhagen.  Is it not
probable," suggested the Doctor, "that the discoverer was some friend of
his residing in that city?"

"More than likely," Farquhar agreed.  "Yes.  Let us try Copenhagen.  We
must first find out who are the professors of Hebrew resident there.  I
will write to our Copenhagen correspondent to-night and ask for a list.
Then, if necessary, I will run over there myself.  In this matter we
must lay out a decisive line of inquiry and follow it up."

"Quite so," exclaimed the hunchback.  "Copenhagen must be our
starting-point.  The initial difficulty, however, as far as I discern,
is that we do not know our dead friend's name.  If we did and could
trace him, we might discover whether he knew anybody who was a Hebrew
scholar."

"The Danish police would furnish us with names and descriptions of
persons lately missing from the capital."

"So they would, that's a brilliant idea," exclaimed the Doctor.  "My
opinion is that the reason why he refused his name to me, even at the
final moment, was because he was wanted by the police, and intended that
they should remain in ignorance of his end."

"If so, it makes our inquiry far easier," declared Frank.  "And suppose
we find him?" he asked.

"If we find him," answered Diamond, looking straight into the eyes of
the ambitious man opposite--"if we find him, we will compel him to
furnish to us the context of the statement."

"Compel--eh?" repeated the other, a hard smile playing about the young
man's lips.  Diamond was a queer figure and strange persons had always
attracted him.  Through the ugly little doctor he had gained this
remarkable knowledge of an uncanny secret withheld from the world for
over two thousand years.  He was reflecting what a "boom" the discovery
would be for that great daily newspaper of which he was one of the Board
of Directors.

"Then you agree that we shall at once turn our attention to Copenhagen--
eh?" he asked.

"Certainly--the sooner the better."

"We have no photograph of your friend--a most unfortunate fact."

Diamond gave a detailed description of the dead man, and his friend,
crossing to his writing-table, wrote it carefully at his dictation.

"I've been in Copenhagen several times," Frank remarked, "so I know that
city fairly well.  I wonder whether the man we seek is a professor at
the University?"

"Our first object is to establish the dead man's identity."

"He may have lied, and perhaps was not a Dane after all!  He may have
been a Norwegian, or even a Swede."

Diamond raised his deformed shoulders and answered:

"True, as he was so bent upon concealing his identity he may well have
lied to me regarding his nationality.  Yet we must risk that, don't you
think?"

"But you told me that you were convinced that he was a Scandinavian."

"Yes.  But he might have come from Stockholm, or Gothenburg or
Christiania."

"Our first inquiries must be of the Danish police," Frank said
decisively.  "I'll write to-night to our correspondent in Copenhagen."

"Would it not be best for you to go there and make inquiries yourself?"

"I may do that.  Most probably I shall."

"Stories of treasure are always attractive," remarked the Doctor,
casting a crafty glance at his young friend.  "I hope, Mr Farquhar, you
will make no mention in any of your papers regarding it."

"My dear Doctor, don't worry yourself about that," Frank laughed.  "Of
treasure stories we've of late had a perfect glut.  For a long time, for
instance, I've taken a deep interest in the wrecks of vessels known to
have contained treasure, the exact location of which are known.  As an
example, we have the ship _Grosvenor_ now lying off the Pondoland Coast
with over a million and a half pounds of treasure in her rotting hold.
Then there's the _Ariston_, in Marcus Bay, with 800,000 pounds worth;
the _Birkenhead_, on Birkenhead Reef, with a similar amount; the
_Atlas_, near Yarmouth, with 700,000 pounds, the _Dorothea_, on Tenedos
Reef, with 460,000 pounds; the _Abercrombie_, lying under the Black
Rock, with 180,000 pounds; and the _Merenstein_, on the coast of Yutton
Island, with 120,000 pounds.  In addition to these there are H.M.S.
_Chandos_ with 60,000 pounds in coin in her hold, the troopship
_Addison_ with 20,000 pounds in gold, and the _Harlem II_, lying half
covered by sand with her hold full of silver bars.  All these and many
others are lying in positions perfectly well known, and only await
salvage.  Why, in one gale off the West African coast in 1802 seven
ships were wrecked, all of them containing a vast treasure.  Besides,
the contents of the vessels I have mentioned have all been verified from
their bills of lading still in existence.  No, my dear Doctor," the
young man added with a laugh, "had the story been an ordinary one of
treasure it would not have interested me in the least, I assure you; and
as for publishing any details, why, my dear sir, is it not to my own
personal interest to keep the matter as secret as possible?  Please do
not have any apprehension on that score."

"I have not," declared the hunchback; "my great fear, however, is that
this professor friend of yours may chatter."

"He will not.  I have impressed upon Griffin the value of silence," said
Frank.  "Besides, he is a `dry-as-dust,' silent man, who says nothing,
so absorbed is he in his studies in his own particular sphere."

"Good.  Then we will now transfer our attention to Copenhagen."

"I shall write to-night.  Remain patient and wait the reply of the
Danish police.  I'm open to bet anything that your friend was compelled
to make himself scarce from Denmark, and carried with him confidential
documents which were not his property and with which he had no right to
deal."

"Then if that really turns out so, it also proves another thing."

"What's that?"

"Why, if the documents were to be of any commercial value, they must
have contained the actual key to the secret."

"No doubt.  The key was written clearly in those manuscript folios, all
of which were burned save one," was Frank's reply.  "It is the context
of that document which we must obtain at all costs and at all hazards.
And if the dead man has not lied I'm firmly of opinion that it will be
found within the city of Copenhagen."

CHAPTER TWELVE.

DESCRIBES AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY.

Professor Griffin, for a scholar was a man of unusually rapid action.

He was convinced that another person was following the same course of
inquiry as himself.  Therefore he determined to act quickly and
decisively.

Next day he returned to the British Museum, and after three hours' work
completed the copy of the manuscript.  Then he turned his attention to
two fragments of the Hebrew manuscript of the Book of Ezekiel, one of
the fourth century in the Oriental Room, and the other of the fifth
century in the Harleian collection.

While studying these, he recollected that some fragment of early
manuscript of Ezekiel had been recently found in the Genisa in Old Cairo
by Mr Alder and his companions, and that several of them were in the
Bodleian Library at Oxford.  Therefore, he searched the catalogue, noted
the numbers, and that evening took the train to the university centre,
staying the night at the Randolph Hotel.

Next morning he was in consultation with his friend, Professor Cowley,
and Number 2611 of the Hebrew manuscript was brought.  It proved to be
the text of Ezekiel from chapter xiv, 22 to chapter xlvii, 6.

"Ah!" exclaimed Griffin, the instant he glanced at it.  "It is too
modern, I fear, for it contains the vowel-points."

"Yes," answered his friend.  "I fear it will be of no value to you, if
you seek a very early manuscript."

Griffin had made no explanation of the reason of his inquiry.

"The oldest manuscript of Ezekiel is, as you know, in the Imperial
Library in St Petersburg," Professor Cowley remarked.  "I have here
some photographic reproductions," and from a portfolio he produced some
facsimiles which had been published by the Paleographical Society some
years ago.  They were splendid reproductions, and to Griffin of most
intense interest.

He sat and for a long time examined them most carefully.  He made no
remark to his friend, but from the expression upon his face after making
a pencilled calculation upon the blotting-pad before him, it was evident
that his search had not been unrewarded.

The only other actual manuscript in the Bodleian proved to be a
parchment fragment of chaps, x, 9 to xiv, 11.  But this containing
vowel-points and accents on both Mashrahs, was, at a glance, dismissed
as comparatively modern, its age being about A.D. 220.

The facsimile of the St Petersburg manuscript was to him most
interesting and from it Griffin made copious notes.  Then, that same
afternoon, he left for Cambridge, where next day he inspected several
early manuscripts in the University Library, and at evening was back
again in Pembridge Gardens, where he dined alone with Gwen.

The girl was anxious to ascertain what her father had discovered, but he
was most reticent, knowing well that all would be told to Frank Farquhar
on the following day.

Suddenly she said:

"Frank has gone abroad, dad."

"Abroad?  Where to?"

"To Copenhagen.  He left Victoria at eleven this morning and travels by
Flushing, Kiel and Korsor.  I saw him off."

"Copenhagen!" repeated the Professor thoughtfully, and in an instant he
recollected that the dead stranger was a Dane, from Copenhagen.  What
clue was young Farquhar following?

That night he sat alone in his study reading and re-reading the copy of
the first manuscript he had consulted in the British Museum, and
comparing it most carefully with the extracts he had made from the
facsimile of the St Petersburg codex.

Then he took from a shelf a copy of the Old Testament in Hebrew and
English, and compared the Hebrew with the early texts.

"After all," he remarked aloud to himself, "there is little or no
difference in our modern Hebrew text, except that in the older
manuscripts the name of the Deity is written larger, in order to render
it prominent.  Ah! if I could only reconstruct the context!"

From his table he took up a large envelope, and breaking it open, drew
forth the whole-plate photographic reproductions of the precious
fragments of the dead stranger's manuscript.  These he placed before him
beneath his reading-lamp, and studied them long and carefully,
especially the scrap of handwriting.

Turning again to the extract he had made from the codex in St
Petersburg he re-examined it.  The portion was Ezekiel, ii, 9-10 in
Hebrew, the English of which was as follows: "And when I looked, behold
an hand _was_ sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book _was_ therein.
And he spread it before me; and it _was_ written within and without: and
_there_ was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe."

These two verses had attracted him at Oxford, and they again riveted his
attention.  It almost seemed as though he read in them some riddle
meaning something tangible, for he was making upon a slip of paper
frequent and rapid arithmetical calculations.

At half-past ten Gwen came, and kissing him good-night, urged him to go
to bed, but nevertheless he continued his work far into the night, until
the fire had burned itself out and he rose cold and tired.

He sighed, for though he had alighted upon something mysterious and
hitherto undiscerned in that early text, yet its meaning was altogether
uncertain.

Its discovery only served to increase the mystery a hundredfold.

As he lay in bed, two facts caused him apprehension.  The first was the
existence of the mysterious foreigner who was following the same line of
inquiry as himself, and the second was the true reason of Frank
Farquhar's visit to Copenhagen.

That the mysterious foreigner was making active investigations had again
been proved by Professor Cowley at Oxford, for he had remarked that only
on the previous day those selfsame fragments of Ezekiel had been
carefully inspected by a white-bearded man whose description answered in
every detail to the man who had searched in the Oriental Room of the
British Museum.

"He seemed extremely interested in the text of Ezekiel," professor
Cowley had remarked.  "He was a scholar, too, from the north of Europe I
should say."

The mysterious searcher seemed a kind of will-o'-the-wisp, who had taken
exactly the same course as himself, only he had progressed a day or so
ahead.  Was it possible that he held the selfsame knowledge as that
contained on the half-destroyed statement?

Next day Griffin again visited the British Museum, in order to make
further researches, and on entering, his friend the assistant-keeper
exclaimed:

"Oh!  Professor!  That foreign old gentleman, who is interested in
Ezekiel, was here again yesterday afternoon."

"Here again!" echoed Griffin.  "Have you found out who he is?"

"No--except that he is evidently a scholar."

"What manuscripts did he consult?"

"Only one--the early fragment of Deuteronomy," was the
assistant-keeper's reply.

"May I see it?"

"Certainly," and the official gave orders for the precious piece of
faded parchment to be brought.

It proved to be a Hebrew manuscript of a portion of the fifth chapter of
Deuteronomy beginning at the twenty-third verse, and ending at the
thirty-first Griffin who read Hebrew as he did English, glanced through
it, and saw that in English, the first verse could be translated as,
"And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the
darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire), that ye came near unto
me, _even_ all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; And ye said,
`Behold the Lord our God hath shewed us His glory and His greatness, and
we have heard His voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this
day that God doth talk with man, and He liveth.'"

As he read rapidly the Hebrew words his face brightened.  Something was
revealed to him.  The stranger was evidently following an exactly
similar line to himself, and had, by copying that Biblical fragment,
advanced a stage nearer the truth!

"This fragment is published in facsimile, if I remember aright?" he
asked the assistant-keeper of manuscripts.

"Yes, by the Paleographical Society.  I have a copy if you wish the loan
of it."

And the Professor gladly accepted the loan of the large thin volume of
reproductions of the rarest treasures among the Biblical manuscripts.

The researches of the foreigner showed him to be in possession of some
additional facts.  What were they?  Ah! if he could only meet the man
whose footsteps he was following, if he could only watch unseen, and
note what authorities he was consulting.

For a week he haunted the Museum at all hours, hoping to meet the old
man who held possession of the dead man's secret.

He wrote to Professor Cowley at Oxford, and received a reply stating
that the foreigner had been again to the Bodleian on the previous day
inspecting the two fragments of early texts of Deuteronomy preserved
there.

Griffin lost no time in again going down to Oxford, and next morning
early called at the library.  He remained there all day, but to his
disappointment the mysterious old man did not reappear.  He had no doubt
left Oxford before the Professor's arrival.

From those two fragments of Deuteronomy which had so interested the
stranger, Griffin could make out nothing.  They did not contain anything
bearing upon the theory that he had been following.  Yet he was told
that the stranger had spent five hours in studying them and making
certain arithmetical calculations.

He was sitting in the same silent, restful, book-lined room in which the
stranger had sat.  He was in the same chair, indeed, and before him was
the same writing-pad upon which he had written.

The precious fragment was lying upon the pad of red blotting-paper.  At
his side stood the official who had handed the stranger the piece of
crinkled parchment which he had sought.

"Yes," he was saying, "he made a number of calculations, covering many
sheets of paper, and when he left, he said that his work was unfinished,
and that he intended to return.  But we have not seen him since."

As Professor Griffin was gazing long and steadily upon that early
fragment of Hebrew text, the official, who of course, knew the Professor
well, added: "Curiously enough, after he had gone, I found lying on the
table a piece of paper on which he had been making his calculations.
Here it is," and he placed before the Professor a piece of crumpled
paper bearing upon it what appeared to be a sum of multiplication and
addition.

Griffin examined it eagerly, and, used as he was to the arithmetical
values of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet--for each letter was a
numerical value--he saw instantly that the stranger's secret had fallen
into his hands!  He held his breath as the assistant-librarian placed a
second scrap of paper before him.

By those two discarded scraps astounding truths had been suddenly
revealed to him!

CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SHOWS A FACE IN THE NIGHT.

To the ordinary observer the sum upon the scrap of paper would have
conveyed nothing.

Professor Griffin studied it carefully, however, and mentally submitted
it to certain tests.

What was written upon the paper was as follows:

The Professor begged leave to take it with him to London, whereupon the
assistant-librarian replied: "It seems very much as though our friend
the stranger is applying some numerical cipher to that fragment of
Deuteronomy, does it not?  Of course, Professor, you may have it--and
welcome.  I confess I cannot make head or tail of it."

"Nor I either," laughed Griffin, blinking through his spectacles.  "Yet
it interests me, and I thank you very much for it.  Apparently this
foreigner believes that he has made some discovery.  Ah!" he added, "how
many cranks there are among Hebrew scholars--more especially the
cabalists!"

And in pretence of ignorance of the true meaning of that curious
arrangement of figures, the Professor placed the scrap of paper in his
breast-pocket, and returned to the Randolph Hotel, where he had tea,
afterwards sitting for a long time in the writing-room with the
stranger's discarded calculation spread before him.

In the left-hand corner of the piece of paper was something which
puzzled him extremely.  In a neat hand were written the figures,
255.19.7.  And while awaiting his train, he lit his big briar pipe, and
seating himself before the fire, tried to think out what they could
mean.

But though he pondered for over an hour he failed to discern their
object.  They were evidently the stranger's signature.

He applied the Hebrew equivalents to them, and they were as follows:
"Beth.  He.  He, A-leph-Teth.  Za-yin."  But they conveyed to him
absolutely nothing.

Seated alone in the corner of the first-class carriage, he again took
out the scrap of paper, and held it before him.  That there was a cipher
deciphered into the words "of the Temple that," was apparent.

He started with the ordinary numerical values of the Hebrew alphabet.
They were 7.3.4.1.0.9. which meant: Za-yin, Gi-mel, Da-leth, A-leph, the
zero, and Teth.  These were multiplied by He, which meant 5.  Then
719220, meaning certain other letters, were added and multiplied by
yodh, or ten.  From each number of the total 3, or Gi-mel, was
subtracted, and the English translation of the figures that remained
was: "of the Temple that--"

To such a man, versed in all the cabalistic ciphers of the ancients, the
truth was plain.  Extremely involved and ingenious it was, without a
doubt, but by careful study of this he would, he saw, be able to find
the key being used by the aged man who had in such an uncanny way signed
himself "255.19.7."

He replaced it carefully in his pocket, and lighting his pipe, set back
in the carriage to reflect.

Ah! if he could only come across that will-o'-the-wisp who was engaged
in the search after the truth.  Probably he possessed the context of the
burnt document, and could supply the missing portion.  But if so, how
had it fallen into his hands?

The affair was a problem which daily became more interesting and more
extraordinary.

At Westbourne Park Station, when the collector came for his ticket, he
fumbled for it in his pocket, but was unable for some time to find it.
Then at Paddington he took a taxi-cab home, arriving in time for a late
dinner.

Gwen bright and cheerful, sat at the head of the table as was her habit,
inquisitive as to her father's movements and discoveries.

But to her carefully guarded inquiries he remained mute.  He had been
down to the Bodleian, he said, but that was all.  The old man longed to
get back to the restful silence of his own study to examine the scrap of
paper left by the stranger, and from it to determine the exact key to
that very ingenious numerical cipher.

The man who was in search of the same secret as himself was a weird
person, to say the least.  Both in London and in Oxford, he had come
across the aged man's trail.  That he was unknown in England as a
scholar was apparent, and that he was a deeply read man and student of
Hebrew was equally plain.

He was not a Jew.  Both the Library assistants at the British Museum and
at the Bodleian had agreed upon that point.

They had declared that he was from the north of Europe.  Was he a Dane
from Copenhagen, like the dead man who had preferred to be known as
Jules Blanc?

Arminger Griffin ate his dinner in impatience carefully avoiding the
questions his pretty daughter put to him.  Then he ascended to the
study, having bidden her good-night.  She had received no news of Frank,
it seemed.  For what reason had the young man so suddenly left for
Copenhagen?  The question caused him constant apprehension.  Could he
have discovered any clue to the existence of the context of the
document?

More than once during the day he had been half tempted to go himself to
Denmark, but the discovery of the aged stranger's arithmetical
calculations induced him to remain in London and watch.

Having switched on the light he crossed the room, and seating himself at
the table felt in his pocket for the scribbled calculation.  He failed
to find it.  He was horrified.  It had gone!

He must have pulled it from his pocket at Westbourne Park while
searching for his ticket.  His loss was, indeed, a serious one.  In
frantic haste he searched all his other pockets, but in vain.  The
scraps of crumpled paper which contained the key to a portion of the
cipher upon which the stranger was working was gone!

He sank into his armchair in despair.

Before his vision rose those mystical figures 255.19.7. written in fire.
What was the hidden meaning therein contained?

One line of the sum he recollected: "7.3.4.1.0.9." multiplied by 5.
Mental calculation resulted in the answer of 3670646.  There was a sum
to add to it.  But alas! he could not remember the figures of it.

Therefore the clue, so unexpectedly obtained, was lost.

So he sat alone, his head buried in his hands in deepest despair.

Gwen crept in in silence, but seeing her father's attitude, crept out
again without disturbing him, and read in the drawing-room alone, until
it was time to return to her room.

"Shall I ever solve the mystery?" cried the Professor aloud to himself
as he paced the room presently.  "Misfortune has befallen me!  With that
fragment deciphered I could by careful study have learned the key and
then read what that mysterious searcher has undoubtedly read.  Ah! if I
could only meet him.  Then I would follow and watch his movements.  But
alas!  I am always too late--too late!"

As he sank again into a chair, plunged in the wildest despair, the dark
figure of a tall, thick-set, military-looking man of about forty, in a
long dark overcoat, passed and repassed the house in the rainy night.

For some time, he had been waiting at Notting Hill Gate Station, almost
opposite the end of Pembridge Gardens, glancing at the clock now and
then, as though impatiently watching for someone.  Then, at last, as if
full of determination he had crossed the Bayswater Road, and strolled
slowly past Professor Griffin's house, eyeing its lighted windows with
considerable curiosity as he went by.

He continued his walk as far as the end of the road which led into
Pembridge Square, and there halted for shelter for a full five minutes
beneath the portico of a house.  Then he retraced his steps, re-passing
the house which had aroused so much interest within him, until he came
to the station where he again stood in patience.

The watcher was an active, rather good-looking man, though the reason of
his presence there was not at all apparent.  To pass the time he bought
an evening paper, and stood in the corner reading it, yet in such a
position that he could watch everybody who entered or left the
Underground Railway Station.  There was a slight foreign cast in his
features.  His keen dark eyes were searching everywhere, while the
clothes he wore were the clothes of a man of refined taste.

From time to time there played about his dark face a sinister smile--a
smile of triumph.  He was evidently not a man to be trifled with, and it
seemed very much as though he held the owner of that comfortable house
in resentment.

The words he muttered as he stood there pretending to read were, in
themselves, sufficient indication of this:

"They thought to trick him--to trick me--but by Jove, they'll find
themselves mistaken!" and his claw-like hand gripped the newspaper until
it trembled in his grasp.

He lit a cigarette, and twice crossed the road.  Standing at the corner
of Pembridge Gardens, he again looked up the street, dark, misty, and
deserted on that winter's night.

"They laugh at us without a doubt," he muttered to himself.  "They
laugh, because they think he's fool enough to give away the secret.
Yes, they take him for a blind idiot.  Frank Farquhar has gone upon a
fool's errand to Denmark, intending to `freeze us out' of what is justly
ours.  When he returns, he will find that I have checkmated both him and
his friend Griffin, in a manner in which he little expects."

His countenance was full of craft and cunning; his smile was sufficient
index to his character.

Soon after ten o'clock, while standing at the corner of Pembridge
Gardens, he suddenly drew back into the shadow, turned upon his heel and
crossed the road to the station, in order to avoid notice.

Having gained the opposite pavement, he drew back again into the shadow,
and saw a female figure in a short dark skirt, and wearing a handsome
white fox boa, hurrying across the road in his direction.

She passed him, and he for the first time caught sight of her pretty
face.  It was Gwen Griffin.

Apparently she was in a frantic hurry, for she rushed into the
booking-office and in her haste to get a ticket, dropped her purse.
Then, when she had run down the stairs to the platform, the silent
watcher followed leisurely, obtained a ticket for Earl's Court, but was
careful not to gain the platform until the girl had already left.

"I thought the story would alarm her," he laughed to himself as he stood
awaiting the next "Circle" train.  "Ah, my fine young fellow, you've
made a great and a most fatal error!" he added with a dry laugh, as he
paced the platform.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

IN WHICH OWEN BECOMES ANXIOUS.

When just on the point of retiring, the maid had brought Gwen up a
telegram from Frank, stating that something serious had occurred, that
he had returned to London unexpectedly, and that he was unable to come
to the house as he preferred not to meet her father, and urging her to
meet him at Earl's Court Station at a quarter past ten that night.

In greatest alarm, and wondering what could possibly have occurred, the
girl had dipped on the first things that had come to her hand and had
dashed out to meet her lover.

Before going forth she had taken the maid into her confidence, saying:

"I have to go out, Laura.  You need not mention anything to my father.
Leave the front door unbolted.  I will take the latch-key."

The dark-eyed girl, with whom Miss Gwen was a great favourite, promised
to say nothing, and had let her young mistress quietly out.

Gwen was puzzled why Frank should appoint to meet her at Earl's Court.
If the interview was to be a secret one, why had he not committed a
breach of the _convenances_ and asked her to his rooms?  She had been
there to tea once--in strictest secrecy, of course--but in company with
a girl friend.

What untoward circumstances could have arisen to bring Frank back before
he reached Copenhagen?  He could not have got further than Hamburg, she
reflected--if as far.

At Earl's Court she alighted, and having ascended the stairs in eager
expectation, passed through the booking-office into the Earl's Court
Road, expecting her lover to meet her.

But she was disappointed.  He was not there.  She glanced at the railway
dock, and saw that it was already twenty-five minutes past ten.  The
receipt of the strange message had upset her.  She felt that something
terrible must have occurred if Frank "preferred" not to face her father.
What could it be?  She was half frantic with fear and apprehension.

From out the misty night the tall man standing in the shadow on the
opposite side of the road was watching her every movement.  At the kerb
stood a taxi-cab which he had hailed, and now kept waiting.  He had
remarked to the driver that he expected a lady and would wait until she
arrived.

For fully a quarter of an hour he allowed the girl to pace up and down
the pavement outside the station, waiting with an impatience that was
apparent.  That message which she believed to be from Frank had filled
her mind with all sorts of grave apprehensions.  He would surely never
appoint that spot as a meeting place if secrecy were not imperative.

She noticed that there were quiet deserted thoroughfares in the
vicinity.  There he no doubt intended to walk and explain the situation.

Yet why did he not come, she asked herself.  Already he was half an hour
late, while she, agitated and anxious, could scarcely contain herself.

Suddenly, however, a tall good-looking man in a dark overcoat stood
before her and raised his silk hat.  She was about to step aside and
pass on when the man begged her pardon, and uttered her name, adding:

"I believe you are expecting my friend, Frank Farquhar?"

"Yes," she replied.  "I--I am."  And she regarded the stranger
inquiringly.

"He has sent me, Miss Griffin, as he is unfortunately unable to keep the
appointment himself?"

"Sent you--why?" asked the girl, looking him straight in the face.

"He has sent me to tell you that something unexpected has happened,"
replied the man.

"What has occurred?" she gasped.  "Tell me quickly."

"Well," he said with some deliberation.  "I do not know whether you are
aware that Mr Farquhar was interested in a great and remarkable
secret--a secret which he was occupied in investigating?"

"Yes," she answered quickly.  "I know all about it.  He told me
everything."

"The _contretemps_ which has occurred is in connection with that," the
stranger said.  "He was on his way to Copenhagen, but was compelled to
return.  He has, I believe, gained the key to some extraordinary cipher
or other, and therefore he wishes to see you at once, and in secret.  He
told me that at present his return to London must be kept confidential,
as there are other unscrupulous people most anxious to learn the truth
upon which such enormous possibilities depend."

"He wants me to go to him," the girl cried.  "Where is he then?"

"Not far away," the man replied.  "If you will allow me to escort you, I
will do so willingly, Miss Griffin."

The girl hesitated.  She naturally mistrusted strange men.  He saw her
hesitation, and added:

"I trust you will forgive me for not being with you at the time Frank
appointed, but--well, I don't wish to alarm you unduly, but he was not
very well.  I was sitting with him."

"Then he's ill!" she cried in alarm.  "Tell me.  Oh! do tell me what has
occurred."

"He will tell you himself," was the ingenious reply.  "But," he added,
as though in afterthought, "I ought to have given you my card."  And he
produced one and handed it to her.  The name upon it was "William
Wetherton, Captain, 12th Lancers."

"Do relieve my anxiety, Captain Wetherton," the girl implored.  "Tell me
what has happened."

"As I have already said, Farquhar has made a great discovery, and wishes
at once to consult you.  His indisposition was only temporary--an attack
of giddiness," he added, and he saw that she was wavering.  "I'm an old
friend of Frank's," he went on, "and he consulted me, as soon as the
matter of the Hebrew secret came into his hands.  Of course, he has very
often mentioned you," he laughed.

He was a well-spoken man, and beneath his smile the girl did not detect
his cunning.  Her natural caution was overcome by her frantic desire to
see Frank, and hear what he had discovered.  An instant's reflection
showed her that if he could not meet her it was only natural that he
should send his friend Captain Wetherton--a man of whom he had spoken on
several occasions.  He was stationed at Hounslow, Frank had told her,
and they often spent the evening together at the club and some "show"
afterwards.

"There's a `taxi' across the way," the Captain pointed out.  "Let us
take it--that is if I may be permitted to be your escort, Miss Griffin?"

"Is it far?"

"Oh, dear no," he laughed, and raising his hand he called the cab he had
already in waiting.  The vehicle drew across, and as he entered after
her he spoke to the man.  He had already given him the address before he
had approached her.  As he sat by her side, the man's face changed.  In
the semi-darkness she could not get a good look at his features, yet his
chatter was gentlemanly and good-humoured.  From his remarks it was
apparent that he had known her lover for a long time, and held him in
high esteem.

"As soon as Frank's telegram arrived, I rushed out," said the young
girl.  "It was a great surprise, for I believed him to be on his way to
Copenhagen."

"They'll probably miss you at home, won't they?" he asked, with a glance
of admiration at the girl's sweet face.

"Well," she laughed, "my father doesn't know I'm out.  Laura, the maid,
will leave the door unbolted and I've got the latch-key."

The man seated at her side smiled, turning away his head lest she might
wonder.

Acquainted as Gwen was with the streets of the West End, she saw that
the course taken by the "taxi" was through Brompton Road and
Knightsbridge to Hyde Park Corner, then straight up South Audley Street
and across one of the squares, Grosvenor Square she believed it to be.

"Why isn't Frank at his own rooms in Half Moon Street?" she asked with
some curiosity.

"Because, having discovered the secret, he is now in fear of his rivals,
so is compelled to go into hiding.  I, alone, his best friend, know his
whereabouts.  Quite romantic, isn't it?" he laughed.

"Quite.  Only--well, only--Captain Wetherton, I do wish you would tell
me what has really occurred.  I feel that you are keeping something from
me."

"I certainly am, Miss Griffin," was his prompt reply, a reply which
contained more meaning than he had intended.  "Frank, in sending me to
you, made the stipulation that he should have the pleasure of telling
you himself.  All I can say is that I believe the knowledge of the
secret will be the means of bringing to him wealth undreamed of, and a
notoriety world-wide."

He was purposely keeping her engrossed in conversation, in order that
they might cross Oxford Street; hoping that in the maze of turnings
beyond that main thoroughfare she might lose her bearings.

Suddenly the "taxi" pulled up with a jerk before a closed shop, in a
dark, rather unfrequented but seemingly superior street, and the Captain
opened the side door with his latch-key, disclosing a flight of
red-carpeted stairs.

"Here are my rooms," Wetherton explained.  "Frank has sought refuge with
me here.  He is upstairs."

Gwen ascended the stairs quickly to the second floor, where the Captain
opened the door with his key, and a moment later she found herself in a
large, well-furnished bachelor's sitting-room where the electric lamps
were shaded with yellow silk.

It was evidently the room of a man comfortably off, for the furniture
had been chosen with taste, and the pretty knick-knacks and quaint
curios upon the table showed the owner of the place to be a man of some
refinement.

"Where is he?" inquired the girl, looking around blankly, her cheeks
flushed with excitement.

The man turned upon her, and laughed roughly in her face.

She drew back in horror and alarm when, in an instant, she realised how
utterly helpless she now was in the stranger's hands.  He had closed the
door behind him and pushed back the bolt concealed beneath the heavy
portiere.

"He is not here!" she gasped.  "You've--you've lied to me.  This is a
trick!" she gasped.

"Pray calm yourself, my dear little girl," he said, coolly lighting a
cigarette.  "Sit down.  I want to have a quiet chat with you."

"I will not, sir!" she answered, with rising anger.  "Allow me, please,
to go.  I shall tell your friend Mr Farquhar of this disgraceful ruse."

"You can tell him, my dear girl, whatever you please," the fellow
laughed insolently.  "As a matter of fact, your lover does not know me
from Adam.  So you see it's quite immaterial."

"It is not immaterial," she declared, with a fierce look of resentment:
"You shall answer to him for this!"

"Possibly it will be you who will be compelled to answer to him, when he
knows that you have accompanied me here alone to my rooms, at eleven at
night--eh?  What will your lover say to that, I wonder?"

"I have the telegram," she cried, opening the little bag she carried.

It was not there!

"See," he laughed.  "I have the telegram!"  And before her eyes he
tossed it into the fire.

She bent to snatch it from the flame, but he seized her white wrist
roughly and threw her backward upon the hearthrug.  He had extracted the
message from her bag as they had sat together in the darkness of the
cab.

Struggling to her feet she screamed for help, and fought frantically
with the man who had decoyed her there; fought with the fierce strength
of a woman defending her dearest possession, her honour.

She saw how the man's countenance had changed.  There was an evil
expression there which held her terrified.

She begged mercy from him, begged wildly upon her knees, but he only
laughed in her face in triumph.  She saw, now that the telegram was
destroyed, that this man who had posed as Frank's friend could make his
vile story entirely complete.

She was helpless in the hands of a man whose very face betrayed his vile
unscrupulousness.

In the struggle she felt his hot foetid breath upon her cheek.  Her
blouse of pale blue _crepe-de-chine_ was ripped right across the breast
as she endeavoured to wrench herself from his grasp.

"Ah!  Have mercy on me!" she screamed.  "Let me go!  Let me go!  I'll
give you anything--I--I--I'll be silent even--if you'll only let me go!
Ah! do--if you are a gentleman!"

But the fellow only laughed again, and held her more tightly.

Her bare chest heaved and fell quickly before him.  Her breath came and
went.

"You think," he said in a cruel hard voice, "you think your lover will
not believe me.  But I see upon your flesh a mark--a natural blemish
that you cannot efface.  Listen to me quietly.  Hear me, or else I shall
tell him of its existence, and urge him to discover whether or not I
have spoken the truth.  Perhaps he will then believe me!"

"You brute!" cried the girl in sudden and breathless horror.  "You
blackguard! you intend to ruin me in Frank's eyes.  Let me go, I say!
Let me go."  Again she struggled, trying to get to the window, but with
his strong arms encircling her she was helpless as a child, for with a
sudden effort he flung her backwards upon the couch, inert and
senseless.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

REVEALS THE RIVALS.

Sir Felix Challas, Baronet the well-known financier and philanthropist,
was seated in his cosy library in Berkeley Square, dictating letters to
his secretary between the whiffs of his mild after-breakfast cigar.  He
was a man of middle age, with slight side whiskers, a reddish face, and
opulent bearing.  In his frock-coat, fancy vest, and striped trousers,
and white spats over his boots, he presented the acme of style as far as
dress was concerned.  The whole world knew Sir Felix to be something of
a dandy, for he had never, for the past ten years or so, been seen
without a flower in his buttonhole.  Like many another man in London he
had amassed great wealth from small beginnings, until he was now a power
in the world of finance, and as a philanthropist his name was a
household word.

From a small leather shop somewhere in the Mile End Road he had risen to
be the controlling factor of several of the greatest financial
undertakings in the country; while the house of Challas and Bowen in
Austin Friars was known in the City as one of the highest possible
standing.

Though he owned that fine house in Berkeley Square, a beautiful domain
in Yorkshire which he had purchased from a bankrupt earl, a villa at
Cannes, racehorses, motors, and a splendid steam-yacht, he was still a
bachelor, and a somewhat lonely man.

The papers mentioned his doings daily, gave his portrait frequently, and
recorded with a flourish of trumpets his latest donation to this
charity, or to that.  Though he made enormous profits in his financial
deals, yet he was a staunch churchman, his hand ever in his pocket for
the various institutions which approached him.  Indeed, if the truth
were told, he, like others, had bought his birthday Baronetcy by making
a princely donation to the Hospital Fund.  This showed him to be a
shrewd man, fully alive to the value of judicious advertisement.

In the years gone by he had mixed with many of the shady characters of
the complex world of the City, but now, in his opulence, he had
apparently cut himself adrift from them all, and prided himself upon his
eminent respectability.

As he sat there that winter's morning, leaning back in his big leather
armchair before the fire, he was dictating a letter to the governors of
a great orphanage at Bristol, promising to defray the cost of building a
much needed wing of the institution.

Then, having done so, he added to his secretary, a rather smug looking
man in black:

"And you might also write a paragraph to-day, Stone, and send it to the
Press Association.  You know what to say--`magnificent gift,' and all
that sort of thing.  They'll send it out to the newspapers."

"Yes, Sir Felix," answered the man, making a note in shorthand.

"Let's see, what else is there?  Ah!  The Malms Syndicate!  Write saying
that I withdraw," he remarked.

His secretary hesitated.

"But that, Sir Felix, means ruin to all three.  They are all poor men."

"That's just what I intend," he answered with a smile.  "We shall do
that business ourselves, as soon as they are out of it."

So Mr Stone scribbled rapidly a letter in shorthand, which meant the
ruin of three honest men, who, believing in the great financier's
promises, had taken upon themselves liabilities which they could not
meet.

Such letters are not infrequent.  The great philanthropist, whom the
world looked up to as a model man, who did his utmost for the benefit of
suffering humanity, and who had been rewarded by his Sovereign,
collected his wealth by ways that would often not bear investigation.
But being a big man, he was able to do things which a little man would
fear to do.  For were not Challas and Bowen, with their huge operations
and big bank balances, above suspicion?

While dictating another letter, the butler, an elderly and pompous
person, entered announcing: "Mr Jannaway, Sir Felix."

"That will be enough for to-day, Stone," the red-faced man said to the
secretary, who rose at once, and followed the servant out of the room.

Next moment the man who had posed on the previous evening as "Captain
Wetherton" entered the room, looking smart and spruce in a well-cut suit
of blue serge.

"Well, Jim?" exclaimed the financier anxiously, as he rose to meet his
visitor.  "I've been expecting you all the morning.  What news--eh?"

"Oh!  It's all right," answered the man cheerily, flinging himself into
an armchair without invitation, apparently quite at home in Challas's
house.

"Found out anything of interest?" inquired Sir Felix, pushing over the
big silver cigar-box that stood upon the smoking-table.

"Well--I hardly know," he answered hesitatingly.  "Where's the girl?"

"In Charlie's rooms.  I've had a devil of a scene with her.  She's
obdurate."

"A day's confinement there will break her spirit, no doubt," remarked
Sir Felix.  "Especially if she believes she'll lose her lover."

"I don't know," he answered dubiously.  "She's got a mind of her own, I
can tell you.  She's a regular little spit-fire."

The red-faced man laughed.

"Well, Jim," he said.  "You ought to know how to manage women, surely.
Did my scheme work well?"

"Excellently.  She got your `wire,' and went to Earl's Court at once.  I
followed and after a little persuasion she fell into the trap.  While
she was unconscious, I took the latch-key, and at half-past two let
myself and old Erich into the house in Pembridge Gardens."

"Well--did he find anything?"

"Yes.  Griffin has taken photographic copies of the burnt papers, before
giving them back into Farquhar's hands, and from his copies of various
early manuscripts of Ezekiel and Deuteronomy it's quite plain that he is
making a very careful and complete study."

"It seems, then, that Griffin's intention, is to discover the cipher for
himself, and leave the ugly little Doctor out in the cold," Sir Felix
remarked with a snap.  "But, Jim, this business is ours and nobody
else's.  We must crush anybody and everybody, who attempts in any way to
decipher that secret record.  When the Dane brought it to me at the
Ritz, in Paris, I laughed at the idea.  Treasure-hunting was never in my
line.  But," he added with a smile, "I took care to have a complete copy
of his precious document made before I gave it back to him the next
morning, and it is now in the safe over yonder.  Like to see it?"

Jim Jannaway, the man who had on the previous night represented himself
to be "Captain Wetherton," the friend of Frank Farquhar, expressed
eagerness to see it.  Therefore the financier rose, and with the gold
master-key upon his watch-chain, opened the heavy steel door, and handed
his visitor a typed document bound in a dark green cover--a complete
copy of the manuscript which Doctor Diamond had partly burned in that
obscure hotel at the Gare du Nord.

The context of the half intelligible sentences was there--the context
which Professor Griffin was longing to obtain.  And moreover, as the man
turned over the pages, reading swiftly, he came across a geometrical
figure--a plan marked with numbers and corresponding explanations.

"Who made the discovery?" asked Jim Jannaway, late of His Majesty's Army
and now gambler, card-sharper, and swell-mobsman.

"The devil only knows," laughed Sir Felix.  "He says he did himself.
The fellow was hard up and I gave him a hundred francs, but I believed
the whole thing to be a huge hoax, until I consulted old Erich and he
began to puzzle his brains.  Then I saw that there might be something in
it.  My only fear is that Griffin and his friends may get ahead of us.
But you've done well, Jim.  You always do."

"I do the dirty work of the firm," laughed the man addressed, removing
his cigar from his lips, "and devilish dirty work it is at times."

"Well, you can't complain of the pay.  Isn't it better to live as you
are, a gentleman of means, than as I found you five years ago, a `crook'
who might be arrested at any moment?"

"I don't complain at all, my dear fellow.  Only--"

"Only what?"

"Well, I really don't see your object in enticing the girl to Charlie's
rooms.  It might be awkward for us."

Sir Felix laughed, snapping his fingers.

"What?  Are you growing afraid?" he asked.

"Not at all, only I can't see your object."

"The object is simply to compromise her," he said grimly.  "She's a
confounded pretty girl.  I saw her at the theatre with her aunt a week
ago, and she was at Lady Ena's wedding the other day, with her lover,
Frank Farquhar.  Of that man we must be wary.  With his confounded
newspapers, he has power," he added.

"That's the very reason why I fear we are treading on dangerous ground."

"Bosh! leave all to me.  The girl is in Charlie's rooms, there let her
stay for the present," answered the man whom the world believed to be a
pillar of the church, and a devout philanthropist.

Jim Jannaway saw that this man whom he served--the man who held him in
his toils--had some mysterious evil design upon the unfortunate girl.
He could not, however, discern exactly what it was.  He had ordered him
to keep her in that upstairs room, "and break her spirit," as he put it.

The midnight search of the Professor's study had revealed that he was in
active pursuit of the truth.  That meant Sir Felix taking steps to
checkmate his efforts.  Ever since the first moment it had been known by
a chance visit to the hotel while Jules Blanc was lying there dead, that
the fragments of the strange document had fallen into Doctor Diamond's
hands, private inquiry agents, employed by Sir Felix, had been silently
watching the movements of the deformed Doctor, Frank Farquhar, and his
friend, the Professor.  All had been reported to the red-faced man
sitting there at his ease--the man who controlled financial interests
worth millions.

Sir Felix had been convinced by the foreign expert he had consulted that
there really was something in the theory of the unknown discovery, and
he intended that none should learn the truth except himself.  He had Jim
Jannaway, the unscrupulous, at his elbow, ready to do any dirty work, or
make any risky move which he ordered.  In a day Jim could, if he wished,
summon up half a dozen of the most dangerous characters in London, pals
of his, to assist him, for be it said he always paid well--with Sir
Felix's money, of course.

Against such a combination as Challas and Bowen, though Mr Thomas J.
Bowen lived in New York and was seldom in London, no private person
could stand.  The great firm, with their agents all over the world,
gathered confidential information from everywhere, and could plot to
crush any one who attempted to carry through a business that was against
their interests.

Hence any attempt on the part of Doctor Diamond, or Professor Griffin,
to solve the problem in face of the opposition of Sir Felix, was
foredoomed to failure, if not to disaster.  But alas! both men were in
ignorance of the fact that a complete copy of the dead man's document
was in the possession of the man whose hatred of the Jews, his enemies
in business, was notorious; and who would therefore go to any length in
order to secure, for his own satisfaction, the sacred relics and vessels
of Solomon's Temple--providing they still existed.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

OWEN LEARNS THE TRUTH.

When the Professor seated himself at the breakfast-table and the news of
Miss Gwen's absence was broken to him by Laura, the parlour-maid, he
started up in surprise.

"Miss Gwen went out late last night instead of going to bed, sir, and
took the latch-key," the girl was compelled to admit.

The old man pursed his thin lips.  His daughter was not in the habit of
going out on midnight escapades.

"Late last night Miss Gwen received a telegram, sir," the girl added.
"It seemed to excite her very much; she dressed at once, and went out."

The Professor rose from the table without eating, and went to the study
to think.

Upon the blotting-pad lay a sheet of ruled manuscript paper.  He stared
at it in horror as though he saw an apparition, for there upon the
paper, scrawled boldly in blue chalk, were the mystic figures:

255.19.7

They danced before his eyes, as he stood staring at them.  How came they
there, in his own study?  What could they mean?

He looked around bewildered.  Nothing was out of place--nothing
disturbed.  Those puzzling figures had been written there by some unseen
hand.

During his wakeful hours that long night he had applied Hebrew letters
of those numerical values to the array of figures.  But the result was
chaotic.  It was some mystic sign.  But what, he could not determine.

He had found them on that scrap of paper cast aside at the Bodleian
Library, and now again they appeared in the privacy of his own study, to
puzzle and confound him.

Through the next hour he waited, from moment to moment, in the
expectation of a telegram from Gwen explaining her absence and assuring
him of her safety.  But, alas! none came.  Therefore, he put on his
boots and overcoat and went round to the police-station, where the
inspector on duty received him most courteously, and took a minute
description of the missing young lady, a statement which, half an hour
later, had been received over the telegraph at every police-station
throughout the Metropolitan area.

He had taken the precaution to place one of Gwen's photographs in his
pocket, and this he handed to the inspector.

"Well do our very best, Professor, of course," the officer assured him.
"But young ladies are often very erratic, you know.  We have hundreds of
girls reported missing, but they usually turn up again the next day, or
a couple of days later.  Their absence is nearly always voluntary, and
usually attributable to the one cause, love!"

"But my daughter's lover is in Denmark," the Professor protested.

"That is what you have been led to believe," remarked the inspector with
an incredulous smile.  "Girls are very cunning, I have two myself, sir."

"But you will help me, will you not?" urged the old gentleman earnestly.

"No effort shall be spared to discover your daughter, sir," answered the
rosy, clean-shaven man seated at his desk.  "I'll report the matter to
our superintendent at once.  Do you," he added, "happen to know what
dress she was wearing?  I will want a close description of it, also the
laundry mark on her underlinen.  Your servants will, no doubt, be able
to supply the latter.  Perhaps I'd better step round with you and see
them."

So the inspector at once accompanied the Professor back to Pembridge
Gardens, and there was shown some of the girl's clothes with the laundry
mark upon them.  Afterwards he left, leaving the old man in the highest
state of apprehension.

He put aside all thought of the inquiry upon which he had been engaged.
His sole thought was for the safety of his child.

Meanwhile Jim Jannaway and Sir Felix Challas were still in deep
consultation in the privacy of that quiet, sombre study in Berkeley
Square.

"Erich left for Paris by the nine o'clock service this morning," Jim was
saying.  "He wants to consult some early manuscript in the National
Library, he says."

"He's a decidedly clever old fossil," declared the Baronet, knocking the
ash off his cigar, "and I'm convinced he's on the right track.  If we
can only keep these other people off, mislead them, or put them on a
false scent, we shall win."

"Erich has done that already," laughed the other.  "He's been down to
Oxford and pretended to study certain manuscripts, knowing well that
Griffin's researches must lead him there.  By putting Griffin on a false
scent he's simply tangling him up.  Oh! yes, I agree, Erich Haupt is a
wary old bird."

"Then he is now making investigations in various quarters with the sole
object of misleading Griffin, eh?" laughed Sir Felix.  "Really, it's
quite comical."

"Yes, and he lets drop just sufficient information to excite the
curiosity of the officiate of the various libraries and place them on
the _qui vive_.  He does that, so that they shall inform Griffin."

"Excellent!" declared the Baronet.  "As soon as he returns from Paris I
must see him.  I wonder if the secret record really does exist?  If it
does, then, by Jove!  I'll hold the key to the whole Jewish religion.
But one thing is quite evident, my dear Jim, we must crush out all this
opposition with a firm, relentless hand.  You understand?"

"I quite follow," remarked the great financier's unscrupulous
"cat's-paw."

And they continued the discussion of the present rather insecure
situation.

Sir Felix Challas wore his mask with marvellous cleverness.  The world--
the people who read of him in the newspapers--never suspected that the
man whose name so often headed subscription lists for charitable
objects, and whose handsome donation was the signal for a hundred
others, was an unscrupulous schemer.  His had been the hand that, by
clever financial juggling in which some other person was always the
principal, had brought ruin to thousands of happy homes.  He had,
indeed, if the truth were told, climbed to the pedestal of notoriety and
esteem, over the bodies of the men, both capitalists and workmen, he
had, with such innate cunning, contrived to ruin.

The strange story told by that shabby Dane as he sat in the gorgeous
room of the Grand Hotel in Paris, had attracted him from the very first.
Here was a chance of getting the better of his natural enemies, the
Jews.  Ah! how he hated them!  Yes.  He would search, and if he found
any of those sacred relics, his intention was to laugh in the face of
the whole Hebrew community and hold the discovery up to the derision of
the Christians.

What mattered it to him that the Dane had died in penury in that obscure
hotel near the Gare du Nord?  His secret agent, who had watched the poor
fellow from the moment he left the Grand Hotel, had informed Sir Felix
of the man's tragic end, but he had only smiled with evident
satisfaction.  The agent had ascertained that the present document had
not been found among the dead man's possessions, hence the Baronet
believed that the man, before his death, had destroyed it.  It was a
blow to him when he discovered that certain fragments of it had been
carefully preserved by Doctor Diamond.  It meant that opposition had
arisen--a very serious opposition which he must forcibly crush down.

"Charlie returns from Brussels to-day, doesn't he?" the Baronet was
asking.

"Yes.  He ought to be back in his rooms by now.  And he'll find the girl
there.  I've left him definite instructions how to act."

"The girl must be sworn to silence," Sir Felix said with heavy brow.
"She must assist us.  We must compel her."

Jim Jannaway nodded.  From instructions given by the man before him his
eyes had already been opened, and ten minutes later he left the house,
the Baronet's last words being:

"Remember, Jim, there's millions in this business.  We mustn't lose it
for the sake of that chit of a girl, however innocent and pretty she may
be.  Understand that!"

An hour previously Gwen Griffin, struggling slowly back to
consciousness, found that, straight before her, was a square window over
which was drawn a smoke-blackened, brown holland blind.  The gas was
still burning, although the grey wintry day had dawned some hours ago.

She was lying upon the bed in a fairly big room, still dressed, but with
her clothes torn, as they had been in the desperate struggle of the
previous night.  Slowly and painfully she rose, and as she slipped off
the bed she felt her limbs so weak and trembling that she could scarcely
stand.

She caught sight of her dishevelled self in the long mirror of the
wardrobe, and her own reflection startled her.  All the horrors of that
struggle crowded upon her.  She put up her hands and pushed her thick
dark hair from her white fevered brow.

"Where am I?" she cried aloud.  "What will dad think?"

She staggered to the door, but found it locked and bolted from the
outside.  Then she went to the window and pulling aside the blind judged
by the light that it must be about eleven o'clock in the morning.  She
tried to open the window but the sashes had been screwed together.  The
outlook was upon a blank wall.

Before the glass she rearranged her disordered dress, and sinking upon
the side of the bed tried to recollect all that had occurred.  But her
head throbbed, her throat burned, and all the past seemed uncertain and
indistinct.

The only fact which stood out clear in her mind as she sat there, inert
and helpless, was the bitter truth which the man had spoken.  The
scoundrel who had represented himself to be "Captain Wetherton," the
friend of her lover, had showed himself in his true colours.  He had
brought her there for one dastardly purpose alone--to ruin her in
Frank's esteem.

She wondered what had really occurred--and while wondering, and
dreading, she burst into a flood of bitter tears.

At one moment she made up her mind to batter down the door, or smash the
window.  But if she did that, she would, she feared, bring forth that
man now so hateful to her.

She detested him.  No.  Rather would she starve and die there than ever
look upon his blackguardly face again.  The fellow was a coward, a vile
scoundrel who had taken advantage of her eagerness to meet her lover,
and had matched his brute strength against hers.

What should she do?  How could she ever face Frank again?

She must have been carried there and placed upon that bed.  She must,
too, have lain for fully twelve hours in blank unconsciousness.

What had she done, she wondered, that this shameful trick should be
played upon her?  Alas! she had read accounts in the newspapers of how
young girls had been decoyed and betrayed in our great world of London.
Ah! it was no new thing she knew.  Yet how long, she asked herself, was
her imprisonment to continue?  How long before she would be able at
least to reassure her father of her safety?

For a full hour she sat in bitter tears, alone, disconsolate, and full
of grave apprehension, until of a sudden she heard a footstep outside
the door.

She held her breath.  Horror!  It was that man again.

The bolts were withdrawn, the door opened, and on the threshold stood a
man, much taller, thinner and slightly older than the false "Captain
Wetherton," a pale-faced man she had never seen before.

"Hullo!" he asked, looking her straight in the face.  "How are you this
morning, my dear?  You haven't had any breakfast, I suppose?"

"I want none, sir," was her haughty reply.  "I only wish to leave this
place.  I was entrapped here last night."

"Unfortunately, my dear girl, I know nothing about last night," replied
the man.  "I returned from the Continent only this morning.  These
happen to be my chambers, and I find they now contain a very charming
tenant!"

She looked at him with her big eyes.

"I hope, sir, you do not intend to add further in suit to that which I
have already received here," she said in a voice of bitter reproach,
holding her torn silk blouse together with her hand.

He noticed the state of her dress, and saw what a fierce struggle must
have taken place between her and Jim Jannaway.

"My dear girl," he said in a reassuring tone, "providing you are
reasonable, and don't create a scene, my intention is to treat you with
the deference due to every lady."

"Is that your promise?" asked the girl in breathless eagerness.

"It is my promise--but upon one condition," said the man in a slow
voice.  And then she detected in his closely set eyes a strange look
that she had not hitherto noticed.

She asked him his condition, to which he replied in a few hard concise
words, a smile playing upon his lips.

But the instant she heard him she fell wildly at his feet, and taking
his hand in her trembling grasp, begged of him to show her mercy.

But the man only laughed--a laugh that was ominous in itself.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

CONTAINS AN EXPERT THEORY.

Frank Farquhar had been at the Hotel Angleterre in Copenhagen, the hotel
with the prettiest winter-garden in Europe, for four days.

They had been four days of constant activity.  As guide, he had the
resident correspondent of the morning newspapers of which he was one of
the directors, and he had already satisfied himself that, in the Danish
capital, there was but one first-class Hebrew scholar, namely Professor
Axel Anderson, of the Royal University.

Copenhagen he found a bright pleasant little city full of life and
movement, the shops gay and the streets thronged by well-dressed people.
In ignorance of what had befallen Gwen, he was thoroughly enjoying
himself, even though he saw that his visit could have no satisfactory
result as far as the quest for the authorship of the mysterious document
was concerned.

One morning he had called by appointment upon Professor Anderson at his
pleasant house in the Norrevoldgade and sat down to chat.  The
Professor, a well-preserved, rather stout man of about forty-five, with
a fair beard, spoke English quite well.

"As far as I am aware," he said, "there are only two professors of
Hebrew in Denmark beside myself.  They are close personal friends of
mine, and I feel sure that neither of them entertains any unusual theory
concerning the Book of Ezekiel, or they would have consulted me.  Of
course, we have a good many scholars come to Copenhagen to study the
Northern and Oriental codices in the Royal Library here.  Hence I have
become acquainted with many of the chief professors of Hebrew.  Have you
consulted Professor Griffin in London?  He is one of the first
authorities upon the matter in which you are interested."

"Yes, I happen to know him," responded the young man.

"And what is his opinion?"

"A negative one."

"Ah!  Then most probably this typewritten manuscript you tell me about
was some baseless theory of an irresponsible crank.  I would accept
Griffin's opinion before that of anybody else.  There is only one other
man of perhaps equal knowledge--old Erich Haupt, of Leipzig.  He is a
great Hebrew authority, as well as a recognised expert in cryptography."

"What is your opinion broadly upon the matter?"  Farquhar asked.

"Well, candidly, I believe the theory to be without foundation,"
answered the Danish scholar.  "I do not believe in the existence of a
cipher in the Hebrew scriptures.  There is nothing cryptic about the
sacred record.  As regards the vessels of gold and silver from Solomon's
temple, they were restored by Cyrus.  It is true that an ancient
Talmudic tradition exists to the effect that the Ark of the Covenant,
together with the pot of manna, the flask of anointing oil and Aaron's
staff that budded are still hidden beneath the temple mount at
Jerusalem.  And my opinion is that your half-destroyed document is
simply based upon this ancient tradition with which every Jew in
Christendom is acquainted."

"But, Professor," exclaimed the other, "I know that you yourself are an
authority upon cryptography.  Have any ciphers been discovered in the
original of the Book of Ezekiel?"

"Well, yes," was the Dane's answer as he stirred himself in his
armchair, and reaching his hand to a bookcase took down a Hebrew-Danish
Bible.  Then turning to Ezekiel, he said: "There is certainly something
in the Hebrew of the thirty-sixth chapter which has puzzled scholars
through many centuries.  It begins at verse 16: `Moreover the word of
the Lord came unto me saying, Son of man--' Now in the constant
repetition of `Son of man' certain scholars declare they have discovered
a numerical cipher.  In the first verse of this chapter we have, `Son of
man, prophesy unto the mountains.'  In the third verse of the following
one he asks: `Son of man, can these bones live?'  Again in verse 9 of
the same chapter, he says: `Prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind.'
And in verse 11, still addressing him by the same title, he tells the
prophet: `Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel.'  By
the title `Son of man' Ezekiel is so often addressed, `Son of man' is so
constantly sounded in his ears and ours, that it forces on our attention
that God deals with man through the instrumentality of men, and by men
communicates his will to men.  Hence certain cryptographers have set to
work and formed the theory of a hidden meaning in all this."

"But is the actual cipher known?" asked Frank, at once excited.

"Certainly.  It was deciphered by Bamberg, of Paris, forty years ago.
But the secret message had no bearing whatsoever upon the lost vessels
of Solomon's temple," was the Professor's reply.

"What was the message?" inquired the young Englishman.

"Well--the alleged message which Bamberg deciphered commenced in the
thirty-sixth chapter beginning at verse xvi.  The passage has peculiar
claims upon the attention of any one searching for cryptic writings.
Addressed in the first instance to the Jews, and applicable, in the
first instance, to their condition, it presents a remarkable summary of
gospel doctrines, and that in a form approaching at least to systematic
order.  In the seventeenth verse we have man sinning: `Son of man, when
the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their
own way and by their doings.'  In the eighteenth verse we have man
suffering: `Wherefore, I poured my fury upon them.'  In the twenty-first
verse man appears an object of mercy: `but I had pity.'  In the
twenty-second verse man is an object of free mercy--mercy without merit:
`I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel.'  In the twenty-fourth
verse man's salvation is resolved on: `I will bring you into your own
land.'  In the twenty-fifth verse man is justified: `Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean.'  In the
twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh verses man is renewed and sanctified: `A
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you;
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh and I will give
you an heart of flesh.  And I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.'
In the twenty-eighth verse man is restored to the place and privileges
which he forfeited by his sins: `Ye shall be my people, and I will be
your God.'  `This land that was desolate is become like the garden of
the Lord.'  We have our security for these blessings in the assurance of
the thirty-sixth verse: `I, the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it;'
and we are directed to the means of obtaining them in the declaration of
the thirty-seventh verse: `I will yet for this be inquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them.'"

"And in these verses the French professor discovered a hidden message?"

"Yes.  It read curiously, and was most difficult to decipher.  But
according to Bamberg it was an additional declaration of God's kindness
to man.  God was named as `the God of Salvation,' and `the author and
finisher of man's faith.'  It consisted briefly in an exhortation to
those who discovered the cipher to read, and to believe.  But as for the
hiding-place of the treasure of Israel being therein designated--well,
even Bamberg, whom half the scholars of Europe denounced as a crank, had
never dreamed of such a thing.  No, Mr Farquhar," he added, "you may
rest assured that the remarkable screed never emanated from a Hebrew
scholar in Denmark.  Perhaps it might have come from Gothenburg," he
laughed; "more than one hare-brained theory has come from over there!"
Anderson was a Dane, and the Danes have no love for the Swedes.

"You mentioned some one in Leipzig.  Who is he?" asked Farquhar.

"Oh!  Haupt--Erich Haupt," replied the other.  "He's Professor of Hebrew
at the University, and author of several well-known books.  His
`Christology of the Old Testament' is a standard work.  Besides Griffin
in London, he is, I consider, the only other man in Europe competent to
give an opinion upon the problem you have put before me."

"How can I find him?"

"You'll no doubt find him in Leipzig."

Frank felt that this German was a man to be consulted, yet he was
anxious to pursue the inquiry he had started in Denmark.  The man who
had died in Paris, and had been so careful to destroy his secret, had
been a Dane, and he felt that the originator of the remarkable theory
must have been a Dane himself.  Briefly this was what Farquhar
explained, but Professor Anderson assured him that no such theory could
have come out of Denmark without his knowledge.

"Search in Gothenburg, or in Stockholm, if you like," he answered with a
smile.  "My own idea is that the unfortunate man was deceived by some
`cock-and-bull' story, probably an attempt to raise money in order to
carry out a scheme to recover the treasure of Solomon.  He believed the
story of the existence of the temple treasure, and in order that no
other person should obtain knowledge of the secret destroyed it before
his death."

"But who was the discoverer of the secret?" asked the Englishman.

"Who can tell," remarked the Danish professor, shrugging his shoulders.
"Perhaps it was only some ingenious financial swindle.  You have surely
had many such in London in recent years.  You call them in English, I
believe, `wild-cat' schemes."

"There are many `wild-cat' schemes in the City of London at the present
moment," Frank remarked with a laugh, "but I guarantee that none is so
extraordinary as this."

"Probably not," laughed the Dane.  "I confess that, to me, the whole
thing seems like a fairy tale."

"Then you don't discern any foundation in fact?"

"Only of tradition--the Old Testament tradition that the treasures are
still hidden in the temple mount.  Yet, in opposition to this, we have
another tradition to the effect that the vessels of Solomon's temple
were used in Persia four hundred years after the captivity.  Mention is
made of this in a Persian manuscript preserved in your British Museum in
London.  I forget the number, but it can easily be looked up in the
catalogue of Oriental manuscripts."

"You believe that statement authentic?"

"As authentic as any statement in the ancient records," was his reply.
"But I would suggest that you consult Haupt.  He knows more of Hebrew
cryptograms and ciphers than any one else on the Continent of Europe.
What does Professor Griffin think?"

"He's inclined to treat the whole theory with levity."

Professor Anderson smiled.

"Of course," he said.  "Supposed ciphers in certain books of the Old
Testament are many.  And as you know quite well, a cipher may be
invented to fit any message or record desired.  Your Baconian theory in
regard to Shakespeare was sufficient proof of that."

"Then in your opinion no real cipher exists in the Book of Ezekiel?"
asked the Englishman.

"The Bible was inspired," was his reply.  "If so, there is no cipher in
it except what cryptographers invent."

Frank Farquhar was silent.  His inquiries in the Danish capital had
nearly carried him into a _cul-de-sac_.

The dead man was, according to his own story, a Dane.  But what more
natural than that he had received the extraordinary manuscript from
Germany, or from Sweden?

"To me," remarked the Professor, "the situation of the man who died in
Paris was this.  Either he himself was the inventor of the whole story
or else he had paid something for it and was trying to dispose of it to
some financier or other."

"Doctor Diamond, my friend who attended him before his death, says that
the man was evidently a scholar."

"Then possibly he was the inventor," remarked Anderson decisively.  "But
if he was a scholar he was certainly unknown to us.  Therefore we may be
permitted to doubt his _bona-fides_.  My advice to you is to find
Haupt."

"Yes, Professor," answered the young man, "I will."

And an hour later he sent a long telegram to the Doctor at Horsford,
while that same afternoon he received a brief telegraphic message from
Professor Griffin, asking him to return to London at once.

His belief was that the great expert had found some clue, and he left
that same evening direct for London, by way of Kiel, Hamburg and
Flushing.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

SHOWS THE ENEMY'S TACTICS.

The tall, thin man into whose chambers Gwen Griffin had been enticed
treated the trembling girl with a certain amount of politeness.  Her
head reeled.  She hardly knew where she was, or what had occurred.

The stipulation he had made, at the instructions left by Jim Jannaway,
was that she must remain there in order to meet some person who was
desirous of making her acquaintance.  He did not say who this person
was, but she, on her part, had a dozen times begged him to release her,
or at least to telegraph to her father assuring him of her safety.

"My dear girl," the tall man had answered, "don't distress yourself.
Come, do calm yourself."  And he assisted to raise her to her feet
again.  "No harm will befall you, I assure you."

"I--I don't know you, sir," she faltered through her tears, "therefore
how can I possibly trust you?"

"I can only assure you that I am acting upon instructions.  As far as
I'm concerned, you might walk out free--only I dare not disobey my
orders."

"You dare not--and you a man!" she cried.

"There are some things that a man such as myself dare not do, miss--
pardon me, but I haven't the pleasure of knowing your name."

"Griffin--Gwen Griffin is my name," and she also told him where she
lived.  Then she asked: "Why have I been brought here?"

"I haven't the slightest idea," was the stranger's reply.  "These are my
chambers, and a friend of mine has had the key during my three years'
absence abroad.  I returned only this morning to find you locked up in
here and a note left for me, giving me instructions to keep you here
until a gentleman calls to see you."

"Ah! that horrid blackguard!" she screamed.  "That man who met me, and
called himself `Captain Wetherton.'  He told me I should find Frank in
hiding here."

"And who's Frank?" asked the stranger.

"The man to whom I'm engaged."

"H'm," grunted the other; "and he wouldn't be very pleased to find you
here, with me, would he?"

"No.  That is why I've been entrapped herein order to compromise me in
the eyes of the man who loves me."

"Why?" asked the owner of those bachelor chambers, leaning upon the
bed-rail and looking at her.

"How can I tell?" said the frightened girl.  "As far as I know, I've
done nothing whatever to warrant this."

"Ah! in this world it is the innocent who mostly suffer," he remarked.

"But will you not allow me to go?" she implored eagerly.  "Remember that
all my future happiness depends upon your generosity in this matter."

"My dear child," he replied, placing his hand upon her shoulder, "if I
dare, I would.  But to tell you the truth, I, like yourself, am in the
hands of certain persons who are utterly unscrupulous.  I tell you,
quite frankly, that I couldn't afford to excite their animosity by
disobeying these orders I have received."

"But who is this gentleman who desires to see me?" she demanded quickly.

"I don't know.  No name is given."

"Why--for what reason does he wish to see me?  Could he not have called
at Pembridge Gardens, or even written making a secret appointment in
Kensington Gardens or in the Park?"

"To that I am quite unable to give any reply, for I'm in ignorance like
yourself."

"But is it that brutal fellow who threw me down and tore my clothes last
night?" she asked.  "Look!" and she showed her torn blouse.

"I think not," was his response.  "But those rents look a bit ugly,
don't they," he added.  "Come through into the sitting-room, and see if
we can't find a needle and cotton.  I used to keep a travelling
housewife, full of all sorts of buttons and needles and things."

So the pair passed along the short, narrow passage of the flat into the
sitting-room which she so vividly recollected the night before.  Before
her was the couch upon which the man who had called himself "Wetherton"
had flung her fainting and insensible.

After a brief search in the drawers of an old oak bureau, over in the
corner, the stranger produced a small roll of khaki, in the pockets of
which were all sorts of cottons, buttons, needles and odds and ends, the
requisites of a travelling bachelor.

She laughed as she selected a needle and a reel of cotton, and then
retired into the bedroom where, for a full quarter of an hour, she sat
alone mending her torn garments.

The man remained in the sitting-room, staring out of the window into the
street below, damp and gloomy on that winter's morning.

"A fine home-coming indeed!" he muttered to himself.  "They've put a
nice thing upon me--abduct a girl, and then leave her in my charge!
Jim's afraid of being connected with the affair, that's evident.  I
wonder who she is, and why they want her?  Devilish pretty, and no
mistake.  It really seems a blackguardly shame to treat her badly, and
wreck her young life, as they no doubt intend.  By Gad!  Jim and his
friends are cruel as the grave.  Poor little thing!"  And he sighed and,
crossing the room, applied a match to the fire that had already been
laid.

"Yes," he remarked under his breath.  "A fine home-coming.  The devils
hold me in the hollow of their hands, alas!  But if they dare to give me
away, by Jove!  I wouldn't spare one of them.  These last two years I've
tried to live honestly, and nearly starved in doing so.  And now they
bring me back by force--back to the old life, because they want my
assistance.  And if I refuse?  Then--well, I suppose they'll compel me
to act according to their instructions.  Here is a specimen of the dirty
work in progress.  I'm holding a poor innocent girl a prisoner on their
behalf!  I'd let her go now--this very moment, but if I did--if I did--
what then?  I'd be given away to the police in half an hour.  No.  I
can't afford that--by God, I can't.  She must stay here."

Presently Gwen emerged from the bedroom with her blouse repaired, and he
induced her to seat herself reluctantly in the armchair before the fire.

He lit a cigarette and, taking another chair, endeavoured to reassure
her that she need have no fear of him.

Then they commenced to chat, he endeavouring to learn something from her
which might give him an idea of the reason why she had been enticed
there.  But with a woman's clever evasion, she would tell him nothing.

He inquired about her lover, but she was silent regarding him.  She only
said:

"He is abroad just now.  And they are evidently aware of his absence.
The telegram I received was worded most cleverly.  I unfortunately fell
a victim to their vile conspiracy."

"Is it a plot to prevent you marrying him, do you think?"

"It must be.  It can be nothing else," declared the girl quickly.  "Oh,
when will he return--when will I be able to see him again?"

The tall man shrugged his shoulders.  He saw that she was desperate and
might make a rush to escape, therefore, though he begged her pardon he
kept the doors locked and the keys in his pocket.

Before his arrival, it seemed, Jim Jannaway had placed provisions in the
small larder in the kitchen, for there they found bread, tinned tongues,
bottled beer, tea, condensed milk and other things.  Hence he had no
necessity to go forth to obtain food.

This struck him that an imprisonment of several days must be intended.
He felt sorry for the unfortunate girl, yet he dare not connive at her
escape.  He knew, alas! that he was now upon very dangerous ground.

The whole day they sat together gossiping.  For luncheon they had cold
tongue and bread, and for dinner the same.

The situation was indeed a curious one, yet as the hours went by and he
attempted to amuse her by relating humorous incidents in his own
adventurous life, she gradually grew to believe that he was devoid of
any sinister intention.

Times without number she tried to persuade him to release her, but he
explained his inability.  Then, at evening, they sat at the fireside and
while he smoked she chattered, though she told him practically nothing
concerning herself.

He could not help admiring her neat daintiness and her self-possession.
She was a frank, sweet-faced girl, scarce more than a child, whose
wonderful eyes held even him, an adventurer, in strange fascination.
And that night, when she retired to her room, he handed her the key of
her door that she might lock herself in, and said:

"Sleep in peace, Miss Griffin.  I give you my promise that you shall not
be disturbed."

And he bowed to her with all the courtesy of a true-born gentleman.

He sat smoking, thinking deeply and wondering why the girl had been
confined there.  He was annoyed, for by her presence there he also was
held a prisoner.

Just before midnight the bell of the front door rang, and a
commissionaire handed him a telegram.  The message was in an
unintelligible code, which however, he read without hesitation.  Then he
tossed the message into the fire with an imprecation, switched off the
light, and went to bed.

Next day passed just as the first, but he saw, by the girl's pale face
and darkening eyes, that the constant anxiety was telling upon her.
Yes, he pitied her.  And she, on her part, began to regard him more as
her protector than as her janitor.

He treated her with the greatest consideration and courtesy.  And as
they sat together at their meals, she presiding, they often burst out
laughing at the incongruity of the situation.  More than once she
inquired his name, but he always laughingly evaded her.

"My name really doesn't matter," he said.  "You will only remember me
with hatred, Miss Griffin."

"Though you are holding me here against my will," she replied, "yet of
your conduct towards me I have nothing to complain."

He only bowed in graceful acknowledgment.  No word passed his lips.

On the third morning, about noon, a ring came, and Gwen, startled, flew
into her bedroom and locked the door.

The visitor was none other than Sir Felix Challas, who, grasping the
tall man's hand, said:

"Welcome back, my dear Charlie.  I'm sorry I couldn't come before, but I
was called over to Paris on very important business."  Then lowering his
voice he said: "Got the girl here still--eh?"

The other nodded.

"I want to put a few questions to her," Sir Felix said in an undertone,
when they were together in the sitting-room, "and if she don't answer me
truly, then by Heaven it will be the worse for her.  You remember the
girl of that German inventor, three years ago--eh?" he asked with a
meaning smile.

The tall man nodded.  He recollected that poor girl's fate because she
had refused to betray her father's secret to the great financier.

And this man whom the world so firmly believed to be a God-fearing
philanthropist intended that pretty Gwen Griffin, sweet, innocent and
inoffensive, little more than a child, should meet with the same awful
fate.  He held his breath.  He could have struck the man before him--if
he dared.

He must blindly do the bidding of this cruel, heartless man who held him
so entirely in his power, this gigantic schemer whose "cat's-paw" he had
been for years.

And he must stand helplessly by, unable to raise a hand to save that
poor defenceless victim of a powerful man's passion and avarice.

Alas! that the great god gold must ever be all-powerful in man's world,
and women must ever pay the price.

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

IS ABOUT THE DOCTOR.

Doctor Diamond, in his long Wellington boots and overcoat, was
descending the steep hill into Horsford village one gloomy afternoon
with Aggie at his side.

It had been raining, and the pair had been across the meadows to
Overton, a small hamlet where, from a farmhouse, they obtained their
weekly supply of butter.  This, the fair-haired child, her clean white
pinafore appearing below her navy-blue coat, carried in a small basket
upon her arm.  She had been dancing along merrily at the little man's
side, delighted to be out with him for a walk, when, as they came over
the brow of the hill, they saw a man in a long drab mackintosh ascending
in their direction.

The man raised his hand to them, but at first Diamond did not recognise
him.  Then, as they drew nearer, he said:

"Why--who'd ever have thought it!  Here's your father, Aggie!"

"Father!" echoed the girl, staring at the man approaching.  "No, dad,
surely that isn't my father!  You're my own father."  And the child,
with her fair hair falling upon her shoulders, clung affectionately to
his arm.

In a few moments the two men met.

"Hulloa, Doc!" cheerily cried the man known to his intimates as "Red
Mullet".  "Thought I'd give you a bit of a surprise.  And little Aggie,
too!  My hat! what a big girl she grows!  Why, my darling," he
exclaimed, bending and kissing her, "I'd never have recognised you--
never in all my life!"

Her father's bristly red moustache brushed the child's face, and she
withdrew bashfully.

"Ah! my pet," cried the tall, gaunt man, "I suppose you hardly knew me--
eh?  You were quite a little dot when I was here last.  But though your
dad travels a lot, and is always on the move, yet he's ever thinking of
you."  He sighed.  "See here!"  And diving his hand into his
breast-pocket, he took out a well-worn leather wallet which contained a
photograph.  "That is what your other dad sent to me last year!  Your
picture, little one."

The child exchanged glances with the Doctor, still clinging to his arm.
To her, Doctor Diamond was her father.  She loved him, for he was always
kind to her and always interested in her childish pleasure.  True the
payments made by "Red Mullet" were irregular and far between, but the
ugly little man had formed a great attachment for the child, and when
not at the village school she was usually in his company.

"Your wife told me the direction from which you would come, so I thought
I'd just take a stroll and meet you," the tall fellow said.  "Horsford
does not seem to change a little bit."

"It hasn't changed, they say, for the past two centuries," laughed the
Doctor.  "We are quiet, steady-going folk here."  And as he spoke the
sweet-toned chimes rang forth from the square grey Norman tower on their
left, the tower to see which archaeologists so often came from far and
near.

"Well, well," exclaimed Mullet.  "I had no idea my little Aggie had
grown to be such a fine big girl.  Very soon she'll be leaving school;
she knows more about geography and grammar now than her dad does, that
I'll be bound."

"Mr Holmes, the schoolmaster, is loud in her praises," remarked the
Doctor, whereat the girl blushed and smiled.

"And how would you like to go back with me, and live in Paris--eh?"
inquired the father.

In a moment, however, the child clung closer to Diamond, and, burying
her face upon his arm, burst into tears.

"No, no, dear," declared the red-haired man.  "I didn't mean it.  Why, I
was only joking!  Of course you shall stay here, and finish your
education with the Doctor, who is so good and kind to you.  See--I've
brought you something."

And taking from his pocket a child's plain hoop bangle in gold, he
placed it upon her slim wrist.  Aggie, with a child's pardonable vanity,
stretched forth her arm and showed the Doctor the effect.  Then at the
letter's suggestion, she raised her face and kissed her father for the
present of the first piece of jewellery she had ever possessed in her
life.

They walked back together to the cottage, and after a homely cup of tea,
"Red Mullet" sat with the Doctor in the cosy panelled dining-room, the
fire burning brightly, and the red-shaded lamp upon the table.

"I'm glad you're pleased at the appearance of little Aggie," remarked
the Doctor between deep puffs of his pipe.  "She's quite a sweet child.
Every one in the village loves her."

"I wonder, Doctor, what they'd think if they knew she was my daughter--
the daughter of `Red Mullet'--eh?" asked the red-haired man grimly.

The Doctor pulled a wry face but did not reply.  Alas, he was well aware
that Mr Mullet did not bear the best of reputations, and as a matter of
fact he was wondering the reason why he now risked a sojourn on British
soil.

"But--I--er--is that door closed?" he asked of the ugly little man as he
glanced suspiciously behind him.

The Doctor rose and latched it.  Then he resumed his seat.

"The fact is, I came down here to-day for two reasons--to see little
Aggie and also to make some inquiries."

"Inquiries!" echoed Diamond.  "What about?"

"About something that concerns you," was "Red Mullet's" reply.  "About
certain papers which belonged to a man named Blanc, who died in a little
hotel opposite the Gare du Nord."

"I--I don't understand you.  What do you mean?" asked Diamond, with a
perceptible start.

"Come, my dear Doc, you may just as well be frank and open with me.  You
know the kind of man I am.  You've got hold of papers which don't belong
to you--and well, all praise to you, I say, if they're worth anything.
I don't see why you shouldn't deal with a dead man's property if he
deliberately wished to destroy it."

"How do you know all this, Mr Mullet?" asked the Doctor, his face pale
and much surprised.

"Well, my source of information don't matter very much, does it?"
remarked the other, stretching out his long legs to the warmth of the
fire.  "But I can tell you it's lucky for you and your friends that I've
found out about it--or--well, I can only tell you something would have
happened--something very unfortunate."

"I don't follow you."

"I don't expect you do," was "Red Mullet's" reply, as he laughed
lightly.  "Just be open with me, Doc, and I'll tell you something--
something that'll interest you, no doubt.  What is the purport of this
precious document about which there's all this fuss?"

"It's a secret--a great and remarkable problem which, up to the present,
I'm unable to solve."

"My dear old chap, there are a good many problems in this world which
want solving.  The first of them is Woman," laughed the other.

"Admitted.  But woman doesn't concern this particular matter."

"That's just where you are mistaken, Doc," Mullet interrupted.  "You
live down in this rural solitude, and you don't know what goes on up in
London.  There is a woman in the case--a woman who is very deeply
involved in it."

"Who?"

"We can leave her out of it for the present," replied Mullet.  "I want
to know something about the document."

Doctor Diamond hesitated.  Had this man, whose reputation was so bad,
and against whom he had so often been warned, come there for the purpose
of levying blackmail?  It seemed as though he had!  "Well," he answered,
"I really see no reason why we should discuss what is, after all, my own
private business, Mr Mullet."

"I should not ask you if I had not a distinct object," said the other.
"I may as well tell you that I've already acted in your interests, and
at considerable risk to myself, too," he added.

"For which I thank you most sincerely," responded the ugly little man,
now very much on the alert.

He was extremely puzzled to know by what means Mullet had learnt his
secret.  Surely he could not have been a friend of that man who, on his
deathbed, had refused his name?

"I merely came down here to give you warning," Mullet said.  "You are
not the only person interested in the discovery."

"I know.  I have been compelled to take certain persons into my
confidence, and they will share in the profits which, we hope, will
eventually accrue."

"I'm not speaking of your friends, Doc.  I'm speaking of enemies--people
who are working actively against you."

"Against me!" cried Diamond, starting.  "Who else knows about it besides
ourselves?"

"Ah!" exclaimed Mullet, smiling.  "That's just the point.  While you
possess only a few scraps of the dead man's manuscript, those working in
opposition to you have in their possession a complete copy!"

"What!" cried the ugly little Doctor, starting up.  "Then the context is
known!  The whole document has been read!"

"Without a doubt.  And I should have been in ignorance of your
connection with it had it not been for a pure accident," answered
Mullet.

"Who are my enemies?" demanded the Doctor.  "They are powerful--but I'm
not at liberty to mention their names.  I can only say, Doctor, that if
I can help you in secret in this affair I will.  There's money in it--
lots of money--that's my firm opinion."

"Then you know all about it?"

"Well--I know that the discovery is one of the most remarkable of the
age, and that it seems more than likely you'll be able to locate the
hidden treasure of Solomon's temple.  I'm not much of a classical or
Biblical scholar, but I understand that the theory has utterly staggered
certain great authorities.  And as a mining engineer by profession, I'm
interested.  I've been on more than one treasure-hunt, once in
Guatemala, and again I went out with a party prospecting three years ago
for those sunken Spanish galleons in Vigo Bay.  We located nine of the
vessels by means of that new Italian invention, the hydroscope, and got
up an old cannon, several gold doubloons and silver `pieces of eight.'
According to authentic records in the Archives at Madrid, there are
seventeen vessels full of gold and silver lying at the bottom of the
bay, and the treasure is believed to be worth at least twenty-eight
millions sterling."

Diamond smiled.  Even that huge sum did not cause him dismay.  The
treasure of Solomon's temple would surely be worth a dozen times as
much.  Besides, would not he, Raymond Diamond, become one of the most
noted men in the world if, by his instrumentality, the historic treasure
of Israel was recovered.

"A company has been formed to work the Vigo treasure.  They asked me to
join them," "Red Mullet" went on.  "It's a tempting business, but I have
other matters to attend to just now.  I wonder you don't form a
syndicate to work this scheme of yours, Doctor."

"No syndicate is necessary," replied the Doctor confidently.  "We can do
it ourselves."

"You might--if it were not for the strong opposition against you,"
Mullet remarked.  "No, Doc.  Don't be too sure of your position.  You've
got others who intend to cut in before you, when the time is ripe.
But," he added, "what proof have you that this treasure actually exists.
I'm ignorant in these matters, you know."

"In a dozen places in the Old Testament it is referred to.
Nebuchadnezzar, when he took Jerusalem, carried away over five thousand
vessels of gold and silver from the temple.  Yet this was only the
portion which the Jews allowed to remain there.  The greater part of the
treasure, including the Ark of the Covenant and the tablets of the law,
were hidden and have never been recovered.  We learn from the Book of
Ezra that when Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar's successor, gave the Jews their
liberty, that he restored to Jerusalem five thousand four hundred basons
and vessels of gold and silver which the King of Babylon had taken away.
Those were, no doubt, placed in the new temple which Zerubbabel
erected, but of which we unfortunately possess so very few particulars.
What we are in search of is not this treasure, but the vessels of
Solomon's temple that were hidden by the priests before the capture of
Jerusalem by the King of Babylon."

"So I understand, Doctor.  But what actual statement have you that they
are still concealed?"

"The plain, straightforward statement in Holy Writ," was the other's
reply, as he sat huddled in the big armchair, a queer, ugly little
figure.  Then, reaching across to a small table whereon lay the Bible,
which he now daily studied, and opening it, he said: "Now, listen to
this.  Jeremiah, xxvi, 19-21, reads as follows:

  "`For thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars, and
  concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and _concerning the
  residue of the vessels that remain in this city_, Which
  Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took not, when he carried away
  captive Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to
  Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem:

  "`Yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning
  _the vessels that remain in the house of the Lord, and in the house of
  the King of Judah and of Jerusalem_.'"

"By Jove!" exclaimed Mullet, starting up.  "I didn't know of those words
of the prophet.  But I'm ashamed to say, Doctor, that I never was very
much of a Biblical scholar.  But it really looks as though there is
something in the theory after all, doesn't it?"

For a long time the two men sat together, but though the Doctor was
eager to learn how Aggie's father had obtained his knowledge, the latter
was equally determined to tell him nothing.

"If you carry on this inquiry, Doctor," he said, "it will be a very
risky proceeding--I can tell you that much."

"What!  Your object then is to frighten me into inactivity, Mr Mullet--
eh?" asked the little man, jumping up.

"Not at all--not at all, my dear fellow.  You don't understand.  You and
I are friends, and--well, we'll continue to be, if you will allow me."

Raymond Diamond confessed that he did not understand the object of his
visitor's presence there.

But "Red Mullet" only laughed, and taking another cigar from his case,
said drily:

"Then let us drop the subject, Doctor, and talk of something else."

CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE INQUISITOR.

The police inquiries into the whereabouts of Gwen Griffin had been
futile.

The Professor, beside himself with grief and apprehension, complained
most bitterly that the authorities had not treated his daughter's
disappearance with sufficient seriousness.  In all the interviews he had
had, both at the local police-station and at New Scotland Yard, the
officials had apparently taken the view that the girl had left home of
her own account.  He had been told on all hands that, in the end, her
escapade would be found to be due to some unknown love-affair.

In frantic bewilderment he had telegraphed to Frank Farquhar at the
Bristol at Copenhagen, but unfortunately he had not received the message
because on arrival at the Danish capital he had found the Bristol full,
and had gone on to the Angleterre.  Hence he was still in ignorance of
the disappearance of his well-beloved.

Those mystic figures which the Professor had found scrawled upon his
blotting-pad--the same that were upon that discarded scrap of
waste-paper--also puzzled him to the point of distraction.  Could they
have anything to do with the girl's fate?  By whose hand had they been
traced?

As far as they could discover, no stranger had entered the study.  Yet
those figures--"255.19.7"--had been written boldly in blue upon the pad.
Could Gwen have done it herself?  Had she left him some cryptic message
which he now failed to decipher?  But if so, why did those same numbers
appear upon the scrap of paper discarded by the unknown man who was
endeavouring to learn his secret?

After three days, during which time he puzzled over the meaning of those
figures, applying to them all sorts of ciphers, he took a taxi-cab to a
friend of his named Stevens, who lived at Streatham and was a Professor
of Hebrew at London University.

The pair sat together for some time, Griffin having apparently called to
pay a formal visit to his less illustrious _confrere_, when suddenly
producing the figures upon a piece of paper he sought Professor Stevens'
opinion as to their meaning.

The other stared at them through his spectacles, and after a long
consideration inquired:

"Were they written by a Hebrew scholar?"

"I believe so."

"Then I think their meaning must be quite plain," replied the other
coolly.  "I should decipher it as the duration of the Kingdom of Israel.
Did it not end after 255 years--namely from B.C. 975-721--under
nineteen kings and seven dynasties, not reckoning among the latter, of
course, the ephemeral usurpations of Zimri and Shallum?"

"I never thought of that!" gasped Griffin.  "Those figures have greatly
disturbed me, my dear Stevens.  They have appeared twice in
circumstances extremely strange--traced by an unknown hand."

"But the hand of a scholar without a doubt," was the other's reply.
"Perhaps some crank or other who has the habit of signing himself in
that manner.  I have known men addicted to such peculiarities.  There
used to be a don at Oxford who had the humorous habit of appending his
signature in most excellent imitation of that of Napoleon."

Griffin, recognising that Stevens was correct in his elucidation of the
mysterious signification of those figures, became more puzzled.  The man
in search of the great secret was evidently a crank.  That was most
conclusively proved.  Yet why should that mystic signature appear upon
his blotting-pad?

Was it possible that Gwen and he were acquainted, and that he had
actually entered the house.

The Professor was beside himself in his utter bewilderment.  His
daughter had slipped away, and left him without a word of farewell.  Yet
towards his friend Stevens he wore a mask, and only laughed heartily at
the rapid solution of the problem which he had placed before him.

Was it possible, he thought many times, that Gwen, with a love-sick
girl's sudden yearning, had slipped across to the Continent to join her
lover?  There could be no reason whatever for that, because he had never
for a moment opposed their engagement.  Yet girls were a trifle wild
sometimes, he reflected, especially motherless girls like the dainty
Gwen.

After an hour, however, he bade farewell to Stevens, and re-entering his
"taxi" in King's Avenue, drove back into London, refusing his friend's
invitation to remain for luncheon.

He crossed Westminster Bridge, and alighted at the British Museum to
inquire if the mysterious searcher had been seen there of late.

The assistant-keeper in the Oriental room replied in the affirmative.
The old gentleman had been there three days before, and had afterwards
gone to the great reading-room.

Proceeding there.  Professor Griffin quickly made inquiries, discovering
presently that the man had given the name of Rosenberg.  He was shown a
slip upon which was written the titles of the two rare works he had
consulted.  They were:

"Cryptomengsis Patefacta (1685)," and "Kryptographik, Kluber (1809)."

These were, he recognised, the two leading works on cryptography,
explaining, as they did, all the early systems of secret writing from
the _scytalc_ in use by the early Greeks down to the biliteral cipher of
Sir Francis Bacon.  It was therefore quite plain that the stranger,
whoever he might be, though at Oxford he had made those calculations in
order to test the existence of a numerical cipher in the Book of
Ezekiel, had not yet discovered any true key.

This knowledge gave Griffin great satisfaction.  The loss of that
crumpled paper from his pocket was, he recognised of no import.

Inquires of the librarian showed that the stranger was not known in the
reading-room as a regular reader.  Yet he agreed, as indeed had other
librarians and keepers of manuscripts, that the old man was undoubtedly
a scholar.

This person's will-o'-the-wisp existence was most tantalising.  In
appearance he was described as an old white-headed man with deep-set
eyes and a longish white beard, rather shabbily dressed and wearing a
long black overcoat much the worse for wear.  Great scholars are not
remarkable for their neatness in dress.  They are mostly neglectful, as
indeed was Professor Griffin himself.  To Gwen, her father was a
constant source of anxiety, for only at her supreme command would he
even order a new suit, and his evening clothes were so old and out of
shape that she had, times without number, declared herself ashamed to go
out to the smart houses at which they were so often asked to dine.

But genius is always forgiven its garments, and the fact that the
bearded stranger was described as shabby and almost threadbare did not
surprise the man who went about equally shabby himself.

If he were interested in the "Cryptomengsis Patefacta," then one thing
was proved.  His researches at the Bodleian had been without result.

The continued absence of Gwen, however, prevented Griffin from
continuing his inquiries.  Though times without number he opened the
Hebrew text of Ezekiel and tried to study it, yet he was unable to
concentrate his mind upon it, and always closed the book again with a
deep sigh.

The house was dull and empty without little Gwen's bright smile and
musical voice.  This, he realised, was a foretaste of his loneliness
when she was married.

Next day dragged by.  The following day was cold and wet, and he spent
it mostly alone in his study, after he had been round to the
police-station and obtained a negative reply to his question as to
whether his beloved daughter had been discovered.

That she was absent against her win he was convinced.  She would never
have left him in that manner to allow him to fear for her safety.

Seated alone, he brought out those large photographs of Diamond's
half-destroyed manuscript, and tried to centre his mind upon them.  But,
alas! he was unable.  Therefore, as the short grey afternoon drew in,
with a sigh he rose, put on his overcoat, and telling Laura he would not
be back to dinner, he went forth to wander the London streets.  He could
bear the dead silence of that house no longer.

Just before seven o'clock the dining-room bell rang, and the dark-eyed
parlour-maid, ascending the stairs, entered the room.

"Lor', miss!" gasped the Cockney girl.  "You did give me a fright!  How
long have you been 'ome?"

Gwen, who stood before her, pale and thin-faced and with hair slightly
dishevelled, explained that she had just let herself in with the
latch-key.

"The Professor's out, miss.  'E said 'e wouldn't be 'ome to dinner," the
girl remarked.  "Oh, we've been very worried about you, miss!  The
perlice 'ave searched 'igh and low for yer.  We all thought something
dreadful 'ad 'appened.  Wherever 'ave you been all these days?"

"That's my own business," answered the Professor's daughter.  "I've come
back safe and sound, and I'm now going to my room.  Tell my father when
he comes in that I'm very tired.  Perhaps he won't return till late."

"Shall I bring you up something, miss?" asked the girl.

"Yes, some tea.  I want nothing else."

And she ascended to her own neat bedroom on the second floor where,
after closing the door, she flung herself upon the bed and burst into
tears.

Her nerves had been unstrung by the severe ordeal she had gone through.
When the maid brought her tea, she dried her eyes and allowed the girl
to assist her to change her dusty skirt and torn blouse, and after a
good wash and a cup of tea she felt decidedly better and refreshed.

Laura lit a fire, and when it had burnt up Gwen flung herself into her
cretonne-covered armchair to rest and to think.

Since she had last sat in that cosy well-remembered room of hers there
had been hideous happenings.  The past seemed to her all like a bad
dream.  She shuddered as she recalled it.  Even the events of that day
hardly seemed clear and distinct.  Her recollection of them was hazy, so
agitated and anxious had she been.  Why she had been so suddenly
released from that hateful bondage was also to her a complete mystery.

She was recalling that first interview with the coarse, red-faced man
whose name she had not been told: with what little consideration he had
treated her, and how he had compelled her to come forth from her
stronghold in order to speak with him.

He had asked her many curious questions, the purport of which she could
not discern.  Some of them concerned her father's recent actions and
movements; some of them concerned the man she loved.

But she was independent, and refused point-blank to answer anything.
She defied that man who, in turn, jeered at her helplessness, and so
insulted her that the flush of shame rose upon her white cheeks.

"You shall answer me these questions, young lady," cried the pompous man
in firm determination, "or it will be the worse for you!" he added with
a look, the real meaning of which she was unable to disguise from
herself.

Yet she stood defiant, even though she was helpless in his hands.

"My father's business does not concern you," she had cried, "and if you
think his daughter will betray him into the hands of his enemies you are
mistaken, sir!"

The bloated, red-faced brute blurted forth a quick imprecation, and
would have struck her had not the tall man who was her janitor
interfered, saying:

"No, don't.  She'll reconsider her refusal, no doubt."

"If she does not tell me everything--everything we want to know--and if
she does not consent to do our bidding and bring to us whatever we
desire, then she need not look for mercy.  She is ours, and we shall
treat her as such.  The man who called himself `Wetherton' shall come
back to her.  He'll very soon overcome her scruples and cause her to
reflect!" the man had laughed hoarsely.

"Give her time," suggested the tall man.

"We want no more of these heroics about her betraying her father," the
other sneered.  "If so, she'll regret it.  You know, Charlie, what I
mean: how more than one girl has bitterly regretted her defiance."

Gwen fell suddenly upon her knees, imploring to be allowed to go free.
But her tormentor only repeated his threats in terms which left no doubt
as to what he intended should be the poor girl's fate, and laughing he
took up his hat and strode forth.

From that moment the tall man addressed as Charlie, though he would give
no explanation whatever as to the reason those strange questions had
been put to her concerning her father and her lover, treated her with
the greatest consideration, yet at the same time kept constantly
expressing a fear that, if she still refused, the danger threatened
would certainly befall her.

Again, on the following day, the fat red-faced inquisitor came and put
those questions to her.  But he still found her obdurate.  She
recognised that those people were her father's enemies, therefore she
had determined to say nothing.

Ah! would she ever forget all the horror of those dramatic interviews--
the dastardly threats of that blackguard who laughed at her unhappiness
and who uttered words which caused her face to burn with shame.

And then came the final scene, just as suddenly as the first.

The inquisitor came again, and after another violent scene left,
declaring that the false "Wetherton" should return and become her
janitor in place of the man she knew as Charlie.

The latter seemed pained and very anxious after the red-faced man had
gone.  She inquired the reason, but he only sighed, declaring that the
man under whose power they both were would most certainly carry out his
threat towards her.

Half mad with anxiety and grief, she had then confided in the tall man,
telling him a brief disjointed story of the half-burned manuscript, in
the course of which she had mentioned the name of a man whom she had
never met--Doctor Diamond, of Horsford.  Her lover, she explained, was
the Doctor's friend.

The man had put to her a few rapid questions to which she had replied;
then, as though with sudden resolve, he had risen from the table where
he had been sitting, and clenching his fists poured forth a flood of
execrations upon some person he did not name.

She was surprised at the action, and her surprise increased when, a few
minutes later, he had halted before her saying:

"Though I risk my own liberty in assisting you, Miss Griffin, I will not
keep you here, the innocent victim of that heartless blackguard and his
sycophants.  I have a daughter of my own--a little daughter who is all
in all to me.  `Red Mullet'--that's my name, Miss--may bear a pretty bad
reputation, but he will never lift a finger against a defenceless girl,
nor will he act in opposition to a man who has stood his friend.  My
only stipulation is that you will say nothing.  We will meet again ere
long."

And then, five minutes later, having given her solemn promise of
secrecy, she had left the house, wandering the dark streets until she
had found herself in Oxford Street, where she had hailed a cab and
driven home.

Over all this she sat thinking, gazing thoughtfully into the dancing
flames and wondering.

But from her reverie she was awakened by the re-entry of the maid, who
said:

"Both the Professor and Mr Farquhar are downstairs, miss.  Will you
please go down to them at once?"

She started quickly.  A cold shudder ran through her.

With that vow of secrecy upon her, the vow given to the man who had been
her protector, what explanation of her absence could she give to Frank.

She rose slowly from her chair, her great dark eyes fixed straight
before her.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE FALLING OF THE SHADOW.

Gwen stood before her father and her lover, a pale, wan, trembling
figure, evasive in all her answers.

With the seal of silence upon her lips what could she say?

As Professor Griffin had entered the door with his latch-key a hansom
had drawn up at the kerb, and Frank, who had come straight from Charing
Cross, after dropping his kit at his rooms, sprang out and ran up the
steps to the porch to meet the elder man with a merry greeting.

His first inquiry had been of Gwen, but the Professor's face told him
that something was wrong, and they entered the hall together.  Next
moment, however, the maid rushed forward exclaiming: "Miss Gwen's come
home, sir.  She's upstairs."

"Tell her we are here," said her father, "and we'd like to see her at
once."

Then the two men walked into the dining-room, where, in a few brief
sentences, the Professor explained to young Farquhar his daughter's
sudden disappearance.

Frank was quick to notice that the girl he loved had scarce dared to
raise her eyes to his as she entered the room.  The grey gown she wore,
unrelieved by any touch of colour, served to accentuate the deadly
pallor of her soft countenance.  A change had been wrought in her--a
great astounding change.

"Why, Gwen dear!" gasped her father.  "What's the matter?  What has
occurred?"

"Nothing, dad," faltered the girl.

"That's quite absurd, my child," cried the elder man.  "You've been
absent from home all these days, and sent me no word!  Something unusual
must have occurred."

"Nothing, dad dear--at least, nothing that I can tell you."

Frank started, staring straight at her, utterly amazed at her response.

"But, Gwen," he exclaimed, "you surely can explain where you've been.
The police, it seems, have been searching for you everywhere."

Her eyes were cast quickly around the room, as though seeking means of
escape from that cross-examination.  Then she answered:

"I really don't see what my business concerns any one--so long as I am
at home again."

"This is scarcely like you, Gwen," exclaimed the grey-haired man
reproachfully.  "You are usually so very thoughtful for me, and careful
not to give me cause for a moment's anxiety."

"It was quite inevitable, dad," she replied.  "I would not have remained
silent intentionally--as you well know."

"But surely," interrupted Frank in a voice which showed that his
suspicions were already aroused, "surely you can at least allow us the
satisfaction of knowing where you've been, dear!"

"No harm has befallen me, has there?  Therefore, why trouble about my
absence?" she asked.  To utter those words required all her
self-control.  She knew in what an awkward position she was now placing
herself.

"Well, you seem to regard very lightly all the anxiety you have caused
me, my child," protested Griffin sharply.

"I am very sorry--truly sorry, dear dad," was the pale-faced girl's
reply, "but my silence really was not my own fault."

"At least you might be frank with us now, Gwen!" declared her lover.
"You surely have nothing to hide!"

"Nothing whatever," she said, smiling bitterly, "only I am, for certain
reasons, compelled to regard my recent whereabouts as a secret."

"Why?"

She was silent.  What could she say!  What indeed?  The man Mullet, who
had been her protector, and who had treated her with such kindness and
consideration, making her confinement much the less irksome than it
would have been; the man who had stood between her and her brutal,
red-faced inquisitor, and who, just at the moment when a grave peril
threatened her, had opened the door and allowed her to escape, and laid
upon her a solemn vow of secrecy.  His words rang distinctly in her
ears: "Remember, Miss Griffin, if you tell your friends what has
happened to you it will result in my ruin.  Our enemies will avenge
themselves by giving me over to the police.  Therefore, I beg of you to
remain silent--at all hazards--for my sake!"  And she had promised.

Could she break that pledge, given to the man who had saved her from
shame and dishonour?

By her hesitation, grave suspicions had gathered within the minds of
both her father and her lover.  Ignorant of the true facts, they both
misjudged her.

Frank's quick jealousy had been fired by her determination not to make
explanation.  Yet he had tried to suppress the bitter thoughts growing
within him, hoping that it was her father's presence which prevented her
from telling him in confidence what had occurred.

"I cannot see why you should make such a great mystery of the affair, my
dear child," remarked the Professor, clearly annoyed.

"Well," and she laughed nervously, "perhaps I may tell you something
some day, dad.  But please excuse me now, dear.  I--I'm tired and--and
very upset."

The old man recognised from her pale, hard-drawn features that she was
not herself.  Her highly strung nerves were at their greatest tension.
And, perhaps, after all, he thought, it was injudicious of him to submit
her to that cross-examination in Frank's presence.

Indeed, both men desired to speak with her alone, both believing that
they would then induce her to tell the truth.

Little did they dream that the truth could never issue from her lips--
that the vow she had made was to a man to whom the exposure meant loss
of his liberty.

Her own position was a ghastly one.  She had already realised that.  She
shuddered at the recollection of those hideous insults of that fat,
brutal tormentor--and of the fate which he had marked out for her
because she would not satisfy him concerning either her father or her
lover.

Her sole thought was of "Charlie"--Mr Mullet, or "Red Mullet" as his
friends were in the habit of calling him.  She smiled at the humour of
the appellation.  It fitted him so well on account of his red hair and
bristly red moustache.

Half an hour later the subject of her absence having by mutual consent,
been dropped, the Professor went to his study to write some letters,
while Gwen and her lover strolled into the big drawing-room, gaunt and
cheerless without a fire.

When they were alone he took her white, trembling hand, and, looking
steadily into her eyes, begged her to afford him the satisfaction of
knowing the truth about her absence.

She had been dreading that moment, and she only shook her head.

"But, dearest!" he urged, "surely I have a right to know!"

"I thought you said only the day before your departure for Copenhagen
that you could always trust me, Frank," she answered, in a voice full of
quiet reproach.

"I said so, I admit.  But almost immediately I had gone it seems that
you slipped out of the house without a word, and have only just
returned.  You will make no explanation, therefore what am I to think?
What can I think!"

"You must think as evil of me as you may, Frank," was the girl's calm
reply.

"No, no," he cried.  "Come darling, tell me all about it--in confidence.
I won't say a word to any living soul."

"I cannot tell you," was her faint response, standing rigid, with her
eyes fixed straight before her.  "Please do not ask me again."

"Do you refuse, even me?"

"Yes, Frank--even you."

He was silent.  What ugly incident could she have to hide from him?  He
knew that before their first meeting she had, like many a young and
pretty girl, been a sad flirt; that men had hovered about her
continually, attracted by her sweet beauty and charming daintiness.  He
was not her first love.  On the contrary, she had more than one little
serious affair of the heart; first with a young Italian officer of
infantry at Florence, where she had spent a winter with her father, and
again with the son of a north country ironmaster while staying at the
Empire at Buxton.  She had confessed to those, and others.  Indeed,
hitherto she had never withheld from him any secret concerning her past.
Therefore, why should she now refuse to give any account of her
mysterious absence!

He was puzzled--puzzled by her attitude and puzzled by her determination
to evade his questions.  And, as was but natural, there sprang up in his
breast the burning fire of jealousy.

The amazing, horrifying thought occurred to him that she, the
sweet-faced girl he loved with his whole heart and soul, had, while he
had been absent abroad, met some secret lover, an old "flame" most
probably, believing that she could excuse herself to her indulgent
father and induce him to make no mention of the affair to him upon his
return.  He, however, had returned to London a day too early--returned
to learn the bitter and astounding truth.

Time after time, still holding her tiny white hand in his, and looking
into those dark timid eyes, he urged her to give him some satisfaction.
But she steadily refused, declaring:

"I am unable, Frank.  And even if I were able, you would never believe
me--never!"

"Why are you unable?" he inquired, suspiciously.

"Because secrecy has been imposed upon me."

"By one who is in fear of certain consequences--eh?" he asked furiously.

"Yes," was her faltering response.

"Then is it not right that I, your future husband, should be acquainted
with what has occurred, Gwen?" he demanded quickly.  "By your silence,
you are only arousing suspicions within me that may be cruel and unjust
towards you."

"I regret, Frank, that it must remain so.  I have given a pledge that I
cannot break--even at your request."

"Ah! then your love for me is not so strong as I believed it to be!" he
cried reproachfully, letting her hand drop.  "How many times have you
placed your arms about my neck and declared your affection for me?" he
asked bitterly.

"I do love you, Frank--I swear I love you as much as I have always
done!" she cried wildly, stretching forth her arms to him in her
despair.

"Impossible.  You have made a solemn pledge to another--a man.  Do you
deny that it is a man?"

"No.  I deny nothing that is the truth," she whispered hoarsely, "I dare
not tell you the truth for--for that man's sake!"

"You apparently think a great deal of him!" exclaimed Farquhar, with
rising anger.

"He is my friend--my best friend, as you will some day learn."

"And you actually tell me this, Gwen!" he cried, staring at her.  "You--
whom I've loved so truly!"

"I am telling you the truth," she replied, in a voice again strangely
calm.  "You need entertain no jealousy of him.  He is my friend--my
devoted friend--nothing more."

"And you stay from home for days, and on returning tell me this!" he
exclaimed, his brows contracted in fierce anger.  "What is this fellow's
name?" he demanded.

"I am not at liberty to tell you," she responded, "believe me if you
will--if not,"--and she shrugged her shoulders without concluding her
sentences.

"I have a right to know," he blurted forth.

She realised the effect her words had had upon him.  She saw his fierce
jealousy and his dark suspicion.  Yet what more could she say in the
hideous circumstances.  She was now the innocent victim of a silence
imposed upon her by the man who had been her protector.  How could she
betray him into the hands of his enemies?  Ah! her situation was surely
one of the most difficult and maddening in which a girl had ever found
herself.

To tell Frank Farquhar the truth would be to rouse his mad jealousy to a
great pitch.  He would seek out Mr Mullet, face him, and create a scene
which must inevitably bring down upon her friend and protector the
vengeance of those who held him so helpless in their unscrupulous hands.

Hence she foresaw the inevitable.  It was as plain as it was tragic.
Her refusal to give satisfactory replies to Frank's most natural
questions had aroused his darkest suspicion.  He, on his part, discerned
in her determination a deliberate attempt to mislead him.  During his
absence she had changed towards him, changed in a most curious way that
held him mystified.

"You appear, Gwen, to be utterly unconcerned and careless as to whether
I believe you or not," he said gravely, after a few moments' silence.
"Well, I would like now to speak quite plainly and openly."

"Speak," she said, "I am all attention."  She was struggling valiantly
with herself.

Her coolness was feigned.  Ah! what would she give if she were at
liberty to tell Frank the whole strange and ghastly truth!

"I have put to you a question which you refuse to answer," he said in a
low, hard voice.  "You have admitted that, by this silence of yours, you
are protecting another man.  Well--in that case I can only say that I
must leave you in future to your friend's protection.  I hope he loves
you better--better than I!"

"Leave me!" she gasped in a hoarse whisper.  "You--you will leave me!
Ah! no--no Frank,"--she shrieked in her despair, "you can't mean that--
you won't let--"

But her lover had already turned upon his heel, and without further
words he left the room--and the house.

She heard the front door slam, and then with a sudden cry of despair she
flung herself upon the couch and buried her head among the silken
cushions sobbing.

CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

INCREASES THE MYSTERY.

The morning was foggy, damp and dark in London, one of those to which
dwellers in the Metropolis are so accustomed in the short December days.

In "Red Mullet's" sitting-room off Oxford Street--that same room in
which Gwen Griffin had endured her imprisonment--he and Doctor Diamond
were seated.

A fortnight had passed since the red-haired man's visit to Horsford, but
in accordance with a promise made he had, late the previous evening,
telegraphed to the hunchback, and in response to the message the latter
had left Peterborough by the up-express at nine o'clock that morning.

"Well, Doc," the tall man was saying as he lay stretched lazily in his
chair smoking a cigarette.  "I'm giving away my friend in order to
oblige you, and I've had a lot of difficulty, as you may imagine.  My
friends are a pretty tough crowd, as you know.  But I've fulfilled the
promise I made to you, and all will be well providing that young lady,
Miss Griffin, only holds her tongue."

"Then you've really obtained a copy of the document for me--eh!"
interrupted the ugly little man, his face brightening quickly.

"Yes.  I was very nearly caught in the act of taking it.  It was kept in
a safe, and I had to get hold of the _key_ by a ruse.  I kept it a day,
and got a typed copy made.  Then I retained it to its place."

"By Jove, Mr Mullet, you're a real friend!" cried the Doctor, starting
up.  "As you know, we've been handicapped hitherto by not knowing the
context of the document.  Ours has been all guesswork."

"Well, it needn't be any more," remarked the red-haired man with a light
laugh, "for here's a complete copy.  You'd better read it out.  It's a
very remarkable statement."  And he produced a typewritten manuscript
which the Doctor, after clearing his throat, eagerly read as follows:

  "THE TREASURE OF ISRAEL.

  "Revealed by a Hebrew Cipher in the Old Testament.

  "I, Peter Holmboe, graduate of Helsingfors University, in Finland,
  late Professor of Hebrew at St Petersburg University, and now
  resident at Langenfelder Strasse, 17, Altona, Germany, make oath and
  declare as follows:

  "Curious, and perhaps improbable as it may at first appear, I claim to
  have discovered the actual whereabouts of the hidden treasure of the
  Jewish Temple, which includes among other things the Ark of the
  Covenant, the Tablets of moses, and the enormous treasure of gold and
  silver known to exist before the capture of Jerusalem by
  Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon.

  "_The Secret_.

  "The secret of the place of concealment is contained in a cipher which
  runs through certain chapters of the Book of Ezekiel, and which
  clearly relates the whole story and gives absolute and most complete
  directions with measurements by which the spot is indicated.  And not
  only this.  The same story, in a much more abbreviated form, is,
  curiously enough, also repeated in the same cipher in certain chapters
  of Deuteronomy.

  "It is a historical fact that when Nebuchadnezzar seized Jerusalem
  nearly the whole of the treasure of the Temple had disappeared, and it
  would seem that into the Book of Ezekiel the secret was incorporated,
  so that the treasure, which formed the war-chest of the Jews, could be
  recovered at the coming of the Messiah.

  "Many points are, of course, highly interesting and curious.  Perhaps
  my discovery--which, by the way, was by pure accident--will create
  much controversy and arouse great excitement among scholars and
  archaeologists.  Nevertheless the cipher exists, as I am ready, under
  certain conditions and on certain financial considerations, to
  indicate its existence to any competent Hebrew scholar who may be
  appointed to investigate my discovery.

  "_The Cipher_.

  "For many years I had been greatly interested in the various
  astronomical, astrological and cabalistical signs and cycles so
  apparent in the chronology of the ancient peoples.  In the Bible, and
  more especially during the five hundred or so years before Christ, I
  found evidences of the astrology that was used in the division of
  time, and therefore set to work, using the comparing method in order
  to obtain an insight into the different ciphers most universally used,
  and also into the methods of concealing secret messages and
  statements.  Many of the ciphers used were highly ingenious and most
  difficult to decipher.  The Jews in Jerusalem used them, so did the
  Jewish Greeks in Alexandria and the Buddhists in India, as well as the
  Gnostics, etc.

  "I had been studying certain curious expressions in the `Mischna,'
  which seemed to me to contain certain hidden meanings, when one day,
  in studying the Book of Ezekiel in the original, I was amazed to come
  across an expression which, habituated as I was to the presence of
  ciphers, told me at once that a hidden message was contained there.

  "After countless failures through several years, I one day applied one
  of the earlier known cabalistic ciphers--which, by the way, is so
  complicated and ingenious that the whole message must be deciphered
  before the first word becomes apparent--and, to my intense
  astonishment, on making the complete decipher I found myself able to
  read a clean declaration (extending through nine chapters) of the
  secret hiding-place of the Great Treasure of Israel!

  "The cipher declaration opens with an intimation of 490 years before
  the arrival of the Messiah, and continues as follows:

  "`_The lapse of years are nearing its filling.  The relief of the Doom
  will come in spite of all.  The people's right is nearing.  The Period
  of the Blood-Debts and that of the Suppression will lose its power_.'

  "It is then stated that Moses' tablets, the archives of the Temple,
  the Ark of the Covenant and `the Chair of Grace between two cherubims
  of fine gold,' `the insignias Urim and Thummim with two rubies of
  extraordinary size surrounded by a multitude of other precious
  stones,' the `written archives of the earliest period of the Jews'
  till about B.C. 600, `the great treasures of the Temple, gold and
  silver vessels, coined gold, and precious stones of every description'
  were all `_concealed beneath the earth in a dry-room in connection
  with which is a series of water-tunnels_.'

  "The secret declaration goes on to give the most complete details of
  how the treasure may be reached.  It is stated that there are three
  entrances, one of which is impossible as it is inaccessible, being
  closed up by masonry in a labyrinth of caves; the second is also too
  difficult.  But the third is accessible by draining the water and will
  not present much difficulty.

  "The cipher continuing, declares:

  "`_The tablets shall remain in their hiding-place till the arrival of
  the Messiah, who alone may open their place of concealment, in order
  that He may furnish proof of the faith, and if necessary the treasure
  shall provide a war fund when the Messiah conquers the world and
  establishes his residence in Jerusalem_.'

  "The cipher concludes by declaring:

  "`_Six curses, yea! sixty times six curses, shall be upon the head of
  any one who dare to attempt to violate the treasure-house_.'

  "That the messages, each identical, run through both Ezekiel and
  Deuteronomy is indisputable, and I am quite ready to explain them,
  provided my secret is properly protected.

  "Among the many curious and interesting features which go far to prove
  that the treasure is still lying undisturbed, I may perhaps indicate
  the Biblical fact that, after the Babylonian imprisonment, the tablets
  of Moses were never again exhibited in the Temple.  Yet did not
  Nehemiah convince himself that they were intact and in good condition?

  "We know that Nebuchadnezzar received certain vessels from the Temple
  at Jerusalem (Ezra, i, 7-11) but no mention is made of the tablets, of
  the Ark, or of any other of the things mentioned in the cipher!

  "Again, when Titus destroyed Jerusalem he did not obtain the Ark.  On
  the Arch of Triumph still existing in Rome are representations of the
  candlesticks, but there is no representation of the Ark.

  "Through the whole prophecy of Ezekiel I can point out many evidences
  of the existence of the treasure.

  "And, finally, it is extremely curious that the Crusaders searched
  actively for it, but mostly in the neighbourhood of Engeddin.

  "Whether the treasure of Israel still exists or not, the cipher
  declaration stands out in black and white, one of the best known and
  most difficult of all the various modes used by the ancients for
  concealing messages.

  "I claim that it is a most amazing discovery which must be of deepest
  interest to the whole civilised world, and should be at once
  investigated.  I have not, of course, space to give complete Biblical
  references, etc.  These I will supply later on, if necessary.

  "Any Jew who may be consulted will no doubt scorn the idea of the
  existence of the treasure.  He will do so because he will argue that
  no cipher can exist in a book inspired.  Again, he may declare that
  all the treasure was all carried off to Babylon.  This is, I maintain,
  disproved by historical facts.

  "Again, there may be considerable argument as to whether the Books of
  Ezekiel and of Deuteronomy were written about the same period.
  According to the latest theory, Deuteronomy was written before
  Ezekiel, nevertheless this discovery of the same cipher record in both
  now conclusively proves that they were written at very nearly the same
  time.

  "Further, I am aware of the Talmudic tradition which states that the
  treasures I have enumerated, with the addition of Aaron's staff, the
  pot of manna and the flask of anointing oil, are hidden beneath the
  Temple Mount.  But the cipher in question shows plainly that they are
  not concealed upon the site of the Temple, which is now occupied by
  the Mosque of Omar, but at some considerable distance away.

  "_The Key_.

  "As regards the key to the cipher and the manner in which to decipher
  it, I have, believing my existence to be now short-lived--for alas!  I
  am suffering from a disease that I am told is incurable--placed the
  key, with such directions as are necessary to read it, in a place
  where it will remain hidden until such time as I have arranged with a
  capitalist or syndicate of financiers to despatch an expedition to
  secretly purchase the land in question and excavate for the holy
  relics.  To them alone it will be revealed.

  "The key, which will disclose a statement that must cause the whole
  world to be surprised and thrilled, is divided into two parts, the one
  useless without the other.  One part now lies in one city and another
  in a second.  Therefore, for any person to attempt to discover the
  truth without first entering into business relations with me will be
  utterly impossible.  And even if both keys were illegally obtained,
  the requisite knowledge could not then be ascertained without a third
  direction, that can be supplied by myself alone.

  "If I live, then I hope to search and recover the sacred objects.  If,
  however, Providence wills my death ere my task is done, none shall
  complete it; for none shall ever profit by the secret which the Unseen
  Power has revealed unto us, a statement of which I have herein written
  and signed by my own hand.

  "(Signed) Peter Holmboe, _Professor of Hebrew_."

The following note, with the impression of a rubber stamp, was appended
in German:

"Sworn before me, Karl Weizel, notary public at 38, Neuer
Junugferustieg, in the Free City of Hamburg, on the eighth of July, One
thousand Nine hundred and Seven."

CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

HIS UGLINESS AT PEMBRIDGE GARDENS.

An hour later the Doctor called upon Frank Farquhar in Half Moon Street,
and excitedly showed him the precious copy of the document which "Red
Mullet" had secured for him.

Frank was highly interested, of course, but refused to accompany the
hunchback to Pembridge Gardens.  As his reason, he gave that he had a
directors' meeting down in Fleet Street which he was bound to attend.
Sir George was absent and he was therefore compelled to be in his place.
The truth was that he had no desire to meet Gwen.

The girl had written him several pitiful and reproachful letters during
the past fortnight, but to these he had made no response, except by one
brief note in which he had repeated his very pointed question.

"No, Doctor," he said, "go yourself to Pembridge Gardens.  The Professor
will, I'm sure, be delighted to meet you, and you can discuss the matter
thoroughly with him.  I'll see him this evening."

Therefore Diamond had taken a cab out to Notting Hill Gate, and on
inquiring for Griffin and giving his name, was shown at once upstairs to
the study.

The Professor, with his usual courtesy, expressed his pleasure at the
meeting, though if the truth were told he had not expected to see a man
of the little Doctor's extreme ugliness.  Then, when his visitor
produced the precious copy of the dead man's manuscript, the great
scholar sat down and breathlessly read it through from end to end.

"This is exactly what I surmised from the burnt fragments," he remarked,
taking off his glasses as he turned to where the Doctor was sitting.
"But the great and fascinating problem we have to solve is the
whereabouts of the two keys to the cipher.  One thing seems clear from
the document, namely, that the dead man was Holmboe, the discoverer of
the hidden secret."

"Exactly.  He knew the uncertainty of his life.  Indeed he told me so
when he had his first attack," replied the little man, "the initials
`P.H.' were also upon his clothing."

"He told you he was a Dane.  But in all probability he was a Russian or
a Finn," remarked Griffin slowly turning over the leaves of a reference
book before him.  "Yes--here he is--Peter Holmboe, Professor of Hebrew
at St Petersburg, University, appointed four years ago.  He apparently
occupied a very high post for so young a man.  He made the declaration
in Hamburg, I see, therefore he had, no doubt, resigned his
professorship in order to devote his time to finding capital to exploit
the remarkable secret he had discovered."

"Yes.  But what's the use of the secret without the key to the cipher?"
queried the Doctor.

"None whatever.  We must work to discover the key," Griffin replied.
"If I close study, discover the key myself."

"Farquhar's journey to Copenhagen was utterly fruitless.  We were led
there upon a wild goose chase," the Doctor said.  "The unfortunate fact
is that others are also in search of the secret."

"I am aware of that.  But how did you discover it?"

"I was told by my friend--the man who secured for me this copy--an old
friend named Mullet.  He knows more than he will tell me!"

While the Doctor was speaking, Gwen had opened the door and entered the
room.

She heard the visitor utter the name of her protector, and became
instantly interested.

"This is Doctor Diamond, dear," explained her father.  "You have heard
Mr Farquhar speak of him."

The little Doctor jumped to his feet and bowed, while the girl, in dark
skirt and clean white blouse, graciously acknowledged his greeting.

She was anxious to learn what connection this dwarfed man could have
with her mysterious protector.

"I heard you speak of a Mr Mullet, Doctor," she remarked.  "Is that a
man known as `Red Mullet'?"

"Yes, Miss Griffin.  He is a friend of mine."

"Or rather you are a great friend of his, I have heard--eh?"

"Then you know him!" exclaimed the Doctor, much surprised.  "You met him
abroad, I suppose?"  The girl did not reply.  She was puzzled at the
curious connection between the red-haired man who had been her janitor
and the ugly little Doctor who was Frank's friend.

"I know him," she said at last.  "And being a friend of yours, he is a
friend of ours."

"That's so," declared the Doctor, laughing.  "Some people say ill things
of him, but I have known him for some years, and he has always acted
straight and honourably towards me."

"Well," exclaimed the Professor with some impatience.  "Leave us, child.
We want to get on with the examination of this paper which Doctor
Diamond has just brought me."

"Does it concern the Treasure of Israel, dad?" inquired the girl,
walking up to his table.

"Yes, dear.  It is a copy of the complete document, so you may imagine
how deeply I'm interested in it."

"Has Frank seen it?" she asked quickly, to which the Doctor replied in
the affirmative.

Then when the girl had, with some reluctance, left them together, they
resumed their discussion.

"We can discover nothing tangible without a knowledge of the cipher,"
remarked Griffin very gravely.  "And in my belief, though it is here
stated that the key is concealed in two separate cities, at the time of
Holmboe's death he had it in his possession.  That was a portion of it
which you rescued--the one folio in manuscript.  The typewritten
document was evidently prepared to place before a financier with a view
to the equipment of an expedition to Palestine.  But the additional
manuscript was evidently a record of the cipher, together with its key.
Have you a copy of it?"

"Yes," replied the Doctor, taking from his breast-pocket some papers
from among which he took a copy he had made in his own handwriting.  "As
far as I could judge, the manuscript of which this is one folio,
consisted of about seven folios.  I recollect quite well noticing, as I
placed it in the stove, that certain characters in Hebrew were written
upon it."

"Well," exclaimed Griffin, spreading the copy of the half-destroyed leaf
before him, "that the cipher is a numerical one is quite apparent.  It
seems that it is based upon the waw sign, or sixth letter of the Hebrew
alphabet.  Six is the sign of evil.  Nevertheless I have turned up the
reference to Ezekiel, xli, 23, but cannot find anything unusual in the
Hebrew text."

"Because we do not possess the key," remarked the hunchback with a sigh.

"Admitted.  But we have the basis of the calculation--the regular
occurrence of the letter `w' or `v' in the text.  For days, nay, weeks,
I have been trying to solve that problem, using each of the known
cabalistic ciphers of the ancients, but without the slightest success."

"It is an unknown cipher, without a doubt--even though you recognise the
basis."

"Numerical ciphers are always most difficult," Griffin declared.  "Yet
was it not Edgar Allen Poe who declared that human ingenuity could not
invent a cipher which human ingenuity could not solve.  I have tried my
calculations upon the earliest known text, that preserved in St
Petersburg--but in vain."

"What do you think of the dead man's statement that the key is divided
into two parts--one portion being concealed in each city?"

"I don't accept that as genuine," declared the Professor.  "I regard it
as a mere embellishment of facts, in order to prevent any one from
trying to unriddle the message.  The unfortunate man ordered you to
destroy the directions for reading the message, together with the
statement itself."

"I rather wish I had disobeyed," remarked the Doctor with a grin.  "The
fact that it was in manuscript and not in typing shows that he would not
trust any one with sight of it."

"Which goes far to prove the truth of my argument.  There is a key
number, depend upon it.  When once you have that, and we ascertain at
what point to start, then the secret record will soon be revealed."

"But how can we obtain it--that's the question," the Doctor said.  "I
would like to know how far the inquiries of our enemies have advanced.
This copy was obtained from the complete copy in their possession."

"Who are our enemies?  Do you know them?" asked the Professor, starting
forward quickly.

"No.  My friend, though he had supplied me with this, refuses all
information concerning them, except to say that they are both powerful
and wealthy."

"What do they know concerning the key?"

"Not so much as ourselves.  They do not possess even the few words
concerning it that we do."

"But will not your friend divulge the identity of our enemies?" asked
Griffin, "not if we take him into partnership with us, and allow him to
share in the huge profits which must accrue if anything is actually
recovered?"

"I thought that your opinion upon the whole story was a negative one,"
remarked the Doctor with a strangely wily look.

The Professor, bent upon writing a learned article in the
_Contemporary_, giving a story that should startle the world, held his
breath for a moment.  But only for a single instant.

"Well," he answered without hesitation, "at first I was, it is true,
inclined to regard it as an amazing piece of fiction, but after certain
researches and study I have now come to the conclusion that there may be
more truth in it than would at first appear.  I, of course, regard it
from a scholar's point of view, and not from that of a financier."

"I believe in money," declared the ugly little man frankly.  "It should
be put forward, when ripe, as a sound financial proposition--just as, no
doubt, its discoverer, Peter Holmboe, intended to put it forward."

"Then if so, why will not your friend Mullet join forces with us?  It
would surely be to his advantage!"

"Because he's tied to the other side."

"If it has not prevented him from supplying us in secret with this copy
of the document, it surely would not prevent him assisting us further,
and placing us upon our guard regarding the actions of our enemies.
Have you no idea, Doctor, how these other people obtained a copy of
Holmboe's statement?  It surely could not have been kicking about the
streets, having in view the fact that he was so careful to destroy it
before his death."

"I haven't any idea how they obtained it, or even their names.  My
friend will tell me nothing."

"Who is this man Mullet?  Have you any objection to telling me?"

"The man whom your daughter was discussing--the man known to his friends
as `Red Mullet'--is a cosmopolitan who lives mostly on the Continent,
and, between ourselves, has the reputation of being an adventurer."

"And a friend of my daughter!" the elder man exclaimed in surprise.
"She seems to meet very undesirable people sometimes.  The latitude
allowed to girls nowadays, Doctor, is very different from that of thirty
years ago--eh?"

"What can we expect in this age of the `New Woman' and the Suffragette?"
laughed the other, holding up his hands.

"But could we not induce this Mr Mullet to help us--or at least to
reveal to us in what direction our enemies are working?  They have with
them a very clever and ingenious scholar, of that I have already
satisfied myself."

"Ah!" sighed Diamond.  "If we only could get `Red Mullet' with us.  But
I fear that there are certain circumstances which entirely preclude such
an arrangement.  At least, that is what I suspect."

"I wonder what my daughter can know of the man?" remarked Griffin,
ignorant of the fact that Gwen's curiosity had got the better of her, or
that the door being ajar she had heard the Doctor's statement.

"It certainly does seem a rather curious fact that they are acquainted,"
remarked the Doctor.  "But, Professor," he went on eagerly, "I suppose
you now have no doubt that there is more in the remarkable story than
mere surmise."

Griffin was again silent for a few moments.

"Providing that the sacred relics remain still hidden--and there
certainly seems nothing against that belief, even though some have
declared that Solomon's golden vessels were afterwards used in Persia--
then we have, of course, precise knowledge of certain of them," he said
with great deliberation.  Opening the Hebrew-English Bible at 2
Chronicles, iv, 19, he said: "Listen to this as an example," and he read
as follows:

"`And Solomon made all the vessels that _were for_ the house of God, the
golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shew-bread _was set_;

"`Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold;

"`And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, _made he of_ gold,
_and_ that perfect gold;

"`And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers,
_of_ pure gold; and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for
the most holy _place_, and the doors of the house of the temple, _were_
of gold.'

"Concerning the Ark of the Covenant, which the cipher says still lies
hidden, we have in the next chapter, commencing at verse 7:

"`And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto
his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy _place, even_
under the wings of the cherubim:

"`For the cherubim spread forth _their_ wings over the place of the ark,
and the cherubim covered the ark and the staves thereof above.

"`And they drew out the staves _of the ark_ that the end of the staves
were seen from the ark before the oracle, but they were not seen
without.  And there it is unto this day.

"`_There was_ nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put
_therein_ at Horeb, when the Lord made _a covenant_ with the children of
Israel, when they came out of Egypt.'

"The gold, of course, came from the ancient Ophir," remarked the Doctor,
"and curiously enough the site of this El Dorado has only recently been
established by Dr Carl Peters as having been at Zimbabwe, and the
surrounding region in south-eastern Mashonaland."

"Yes," remarked the Professor.  "There is, I think, no question that
Solomon obtained his gold from that district.  The old workings are said
by Hall and Neal to number seventy-five thousand, and hundreds of
thousands of tons of gold ore must have been dug out during the
Himyaritic era.  The Kaffirs still call the place `Fur.' and the Arabs
`Afur.'  It was from there that Solomon's ships brought the four hundred
and twenty talents of gold mentioned in 1 Kings, ix, 26-28, and in 2
Chronicles, viii, 17-18.  Again, we are told that in one year Solomon
obtained six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold--each talent being
worth eleven thousand pounds of our money--from the same region, most of
which was used in the manufacture of the vessels for the temple."

"Some of which we hope to recover, Professor," laughed the ugly little
man.

"We certainly might," sighed the other, "if only we could discover the
solution of this most fascinating yet tantalising problem."

CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A PAGE IN PICCADILLY.

A long, grey, hundred-horse-power racing motor-car with its two glaring
head-lamps drew suddenly up in the falling darkness before the big house
in Berkeley Square, and from it stepped Sir Felix Challas in his heavy
fur coat, cap and goggles.  He was a motor enthusiast, and declared that
his runs on his high-power racer cleared the cobwebs from his brain, and
braced up his nerves.

He had started forth soon after breakfast, lunched at the Mermaid at
Wansford, eighty miles away up the Great North Road, and was now home
again, just as darkness had set in.

He had sat beside his chauffeur in silence while being whirled along the
great northern highway, for he always thought out the most ingenious of
his schemes while travelling thus.

Ere he had ascended the steps of the house, the splendid car, which only
a few weeks before had made a record on the Brooklands track, moved off
to the well-appointed garage, where he kept his three other cars.

On entering his own luxurious little den on the left of the hall, he
found Jim Jannaway comfortably ensconced before the fire, smoking one of
his choicest cigars and with a whisky and soda at his elbow.

"Hulloa!" exclaimed Sir Felix surprised.  "I thought you were on your
way out to the East?  You were to have left this morning, weren't you?"
And he threw off his heavy coat and stood with his back to the fire.

"Yes.  But I've remained, because I've discovered something," replied
the other.  "I've found out the reason why that girl Griffin got away."

"Oh!  Why?" asked Challas quickly.  "It was a great misfortune for us.
She's evidently discovered who we are, and why we wanted the
information."

"Well--he played us false."

"Who--Mullet?"

"Yes.  The girl appealed to his honour, and all that, and he found out
that she was a friend of that Doctor Diamond, the fellow who attended
Holmboe before he died and got hold of a portion of his papers.  This
man, it appears, had befriended Mullet in some way--so he, like a fool,
let her go."

"Fool--idiot!" cried Challas.  "Then the brute's betrayed us!"

"Absolutely!"

"By letting the girl go, he's exposed us.  Griffin now knows that we are
working against him.  And he is, according to old Erich, the only man we
have to fear."

"Except that man Farquhar, partner with Sir George Gavin, the newspaper
owner."

"Ah!  I forgot him.  But surely he doesn't count?"

"Yes, he does," protested Jannaway.  "He's in love with the girl.  Hence
we must see that he turns his back upon her, or there may be further
trouble.  I foresee pretty awkward complications in that direction."

"Very well, my dear boy, all that I leave to you," answered Sir Felix,
with a heavy, thoughtful look.

"But it does not lessen our danger.  If we're not careful we'll lose the
thing altogether," Jannaway pointed out.  "I've been a full fortnight
making careful investigations.  The Doctor called on Griffin the day
before yesterday, and what's more, the girl has written to Charlie,
asking him to meet her."

"How have you found that out?"

Jim Jannaway smiled.

"No matter," he laughed.  "Except that Laura, the parlour-maid at
Pembridge, is a friend of mine.  I took her to the Tivoli last Thursday.
Told her I was a lawyer's clerk."

"By Jove, Jim," exclaimed the Baronet, "you're always ingenious when
you've set your mind on worming out a secret."

"A little love costs nothing," laughed the nonchalant adventurer, "and
very often does a lot."

"Well, we must know what's going on between them, that's quite plain,"
remarked Challas.  "I never expected Charlie to give us away."

"Bah! he always was chicken-hearted where women were concerned.  He must
have been in love once, I fancy, and hasn't got over the attack yet."

"We must be very watchful, Jim."

"That's why I didn't leave for Constantinople, as you suggested," was
the other's reply, as he tossed the end of his cigar into the fire and
lazily rose from his comfortable chair.  "My own idea, Felix, is that
Charlie is growing far too scrupulous.  One day we shall have him in a
fit of remorse making some nasty confession or other, taking the
consequences, and putting us both into a confounded hole.  Think what it
would mean for you!"

"By Jove, yes!" gasped the other, turning pale at the very suggestion of
exposure.  "We can't afford to risk that."

"I maintain that if Charlie lets the girl escape us and give us away, as
he has done, then he'll do something worse before long," exclaimed the
crafty man with a curious glance at the Baronet, whose back was at that
moment turned to him.

Challas was silent.  He clearly saw the drift of the man's argument.

"Well?" he asked at last, lowering his voice.  "What do you suggest?"

"Suggest?  Why there's only one course open, my dear fellow," replied
the other, glancing apprehensively at the door.  "Get rid of him while
there's yet time."

"He might retaliate."

"Not if he's arrested over in France," Jannaway exclaimed.  "The French
police won't bother over any information that he may give concerning us.
Your reputation stands too high.  They'll only regard him as a type of
gentlemanly blackmailer such as every wealthy man has to contend with.
If we don't do that, then good-bye to all our hopes concerning Holmboe's
secret," he added.

"I fear I must agree with you, Jim," said the other, very slowly.  "He
was a fool for not allowing you to force the truth from the girl.  I had
intended that she should assist us, and--"

"And by Heaven! she shall do so, even now, if you will only leave
matters to me," interrupted the clever, good-looking adventurer, leaning
his back easily against the table.

"I leave them entirely to you," the Baronet answered quickly.  "Act just
as you think fit, only remember there must be no exposure.  I can't
afford that!"

"The secret discovered by that fellow Holmboe shall be ours," declared
Jim Jannaway, slowly and determinedly.

"It might be, if only Erich could discover the key to that infernal
cipher.  He told me yesterday that he suspected Professor Griffin had
already solved the problem."

"If he has, then I'll compel the girl to obtain it for us.  You
understand!" he exclaimed quickly.

"Even though Charlie has become a weak fool, moved to penitence by some
tub-thumping revivalist perhaps, I intend to carry through the scheme I
devised.  The secret of the treasure of Israel shall be ours, my dear
Felix.  You shall be the great benefactor to the Jewish race, and
discover the sacred relics so long concealed."

"Benefactor!" echoed the red-faced man with a short dry laugh.  "Oh yes,
I'll show the Jews how I can repay them in their own coin.  Only be
careful--do, I beg of you.  Charlie is not the man to take a blow lying
down, you know."

"You ought to know me well enough to be fully aware that I never act
without consideration," the younger man protested.  "Jim Jannaway is no
fool at a game of checkmate, I think."

"There was that affair in Bordeaux," remarked the Baronet in a rather
hard voice.

"You believe that Red Mullet knows something of that!" laughed Jim,
admiring the fine diamond ring upon his finger.  "Bah, he is in entire
ignorance.  It was an unfortunate incident, I admit.  But under the
circumstances couldn't be helped.  But there--why need we recall it?
You're so fond of dwelling upon unpleasant themes," he laughed.  "You
gave an extra five thousand to the Hospital Saturday Fund as a
conscience-soother, didn't you?"

The Baronet turned upon his heel, and walked to his writing-table,
whereon stood an electric lamp shaded with green silk.  Then, after
turning over some letters, he asked suddenly:

"When does that girl meet Charlie?"

"To-night."

"At her request?"

"Yes."

"Very well.  I leave everything to you," Sir Felix said with a
mysterious smile.  "It would not be against our interests--if--well, if
we had her in our hands again."

Jim Jannaway nodded.  He understood the suggestion perfectly.

"Charlie ought, I think, to be sent back to the Continent, don't you
agree?" he asked.  "A timely warning that the police had learned of his
return here, and he'd skip across by the next Channel service.  Once
over there, matters would be quite easy.  The Leleu affair has never
been cleared up, you know!" he added in a lower voice.

"I leave it entirely in your hands," declared the plutocrat whom the
public believed to be a high-minded philanthropist.  "Whatever you do
must be on your own responsibility, recollect."

"But with your money.  I want a couple of hundred."

"Ah! hard up again, Jim," sighed the other.  But unlocking the safe
opposite, the safe that contained the typed copy of the dead man's
document, the Baronet took out some banknotes and handed them to his
cat's-paw.

They were French notes.  They were safer than English to give to persons
like Jannaway, for the numbers could not be traced in cases of
inquiries, while they could always be at once exchanged at any of the
tourist offices.  Sir Felix Challas, though compelled to employ men of
the racing-tout stamp like Jim Jannaway, and unscrupulous
concession-hunters like "Red Mullet," was ever upon his guard.

He trusted his men, but in "Red Mullet" he had confessed himself sadly
disappointed.

"Revivalists and missionaries have a lot to answer for," was one of his
pet phrases.

Jim Jannaway, slipping the notes into his pocket-book without troubling
to count them, put on his smart overcoat and well-brushed silk hat, and
wishing his employer an airy "good-evening," strolled out into the damp
chilliness of Berkeley Square, where he hailed a hansom and drove away.

He had given the man an address in Knightsbridge, but as the cab was
turning from the misty gloom of Berkeley Street into the brightness of
Piccadilly several persons were waiting at the left-hand kerb in order
to cross the road.

Among them he apparently recognised somebody, for in an instant he drew
back and turned his head the other way.

Next second the cab had rounded the corner and was on its way along
Piccadilly.  Yet he knew that he had sat there for several moments in
the full glare of the electric lights in front of the Ritz Hotel, and he
felt convinced that he had been recognised by the very last person in
the world that he desired to encounter.

Jannaway sat there breathless, staring straight before him into the
yellow mist, his eyes glaring as though an apparition had arisen before
him.

He tried to laugh away his fears.  After all, it must be only fancy, he
reflected.  Somebody bearing a strange resemblance.  It could not be
she!  Impossible.  Utterly impossible.

But if it had been she in the flesh--if she had in that instant actually
recognised him!  What then!

He huddled himself in the corner of the cab, coward that he was, and
shuddered at the recollections that crowded through his mind.

Would he ever have entered that hansom if he had known that it would
carry him into such exposure--and worse?

But from Jim Jannaway's lips there fell a short bitter laugh.  Was not
his life made up by narrow "shaves?"  Had not he been in hundreds of
tight corners before, and with his wonderful tact and almost devilish
cunning wriggled out of what would have meant ruin and imprisonment to
any other man.

He had been a born adventurer, ever since his day as a stable-lad down
at Newmarket, and he had the habit of laughing lightly at his own
adventures, just as he was laughing now.

Would he have laughed, however, if he had but known how that chance
encounter was to result?

CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE GIRL AND THE MAN.

Gwen Griffin had appointed half-past eight as the hour to meet her
mysterious friend "Red Mullet" outside the "Tube" station at the corner
of Queen's Road, Bayswater.

Immediately after dinner she had slipped up to her room, exchanging her
silk blouse for a stuff one, and putting on her hat and fur jacket, went
out, leaving her father alone in the study.  He was--as now was his
habit every evening--busy making those bewildering calculations, as he
tested the various numerical ciphers upon the original Hebrew text of
Ezekiel.

Through the damp misty night she hurried along the Bayswater Road, until
she came within the zone of electricity around the station, where she
saw the tall figure of her friend, wearing a heavy overcoat and dark
green felt hat, awaiting her.

"This is really a most pleasant surprise, Miss Griffin," he cried
cheerily, as he raised his hat, and took her little gloved hand.  "But--
well, we can't walk about the street in order to talk, can we?  Why not
drive to my rooms?  You're not afraid of me now--are you?" he laughed.

"No, Mr Mullet," was her quick answer.  "I trust you, because you have
already proved yourself my good friend."

Truth to tell, however, she was not eager to go to that place where she
had spent those anxious never-to-be-forgotten days, yet, as he suggested
it, she could not very well refuse.  One thing was quite certain, she
was as safe in his hands as in her own home.

Therefore, he hailed a "taxi" from the rank across the way, and they at
once drove in the direction of the Marble Arch.

Hardly, however, had they left the kerb, when a second "taxi" upon the
rank, turned suddenly into the roadway and followed them.  Within,
lolling back and well-concealed in the darkness, sat Jim Jannaway.

A quarter of an hour later, Mullet let himself in with his latch-key,
and the girl ascended those carpeted stairs she recollected so well.

In his own warm room Mullet stirred the fire until it blazed merrily,
and then helping the girl off with her jacket, drew up a chair for her,
taking one himself.

Her sweet innocent face, frankness of manner, and neatness of dress
charmed him again, as it had when he had been forced against his will to
keep her prisoner there.  As he gazed across at her, he, careless
adventurer that he had been for years, a man, with a dozen _aliases_ and
as many different abodes, recollected their strange _menage_.

"Well," he said with a smile, "I was really delighted to get a note from
you, Miss Griffin.  You said in it that you wished to consult me.  What
about?"

"About several things, Mr Mullet," answered the girl, leaning her elbow
upon the chair arm and looking straight in his face.  "First, I am very
unhappy.  My position is an extremely uncomfortable one."

"How?"

"I have kept the promise of silence I gave you, and as a consequence
Frank Farquhar, the man to whom I was engaged, has left me."

"Left you!" he echoed.  "He suspects something wrong--eh?"

She nodded in the affirmative.

"That's bad, Miss Gwen--very bad!" he said with a changed countenance.
"I know well what you must suffer, poor girl.  You love him--eh?"

"Very dearly."

"And I am the cause of your estrangement," he remarked in a low
sympathetic tone.

"Ah! it was not your fault, Mr Mullet," she cried, "I know that.  Do
not think that I am blaming you.  The real blackguard is that red-faced
man and his accomplice--the man who enticed me here on such a plausible
pretext."

"I am also to blame.  Miss Gwen," replied the big fellow with the
bristly red moustache.  "A deep game is being played, and, alas!  I am
compelled to be one of the players.  It is being played against your
father."

"I know that," she said.  "I overheard Doctor Diamond telling my father
how you had furnished him with a copy of that document describing the
remarkable discovery of Professor Holmboe."

"Hush!" cried Mullet quickly, glancing at the door that stood slightly
ajar.  "There's nobody here, for the man who usually does for me is ill.
Yet we'd better not discuss that action of mine, Miss Gwen.  I only did
it in order to repay in part a great service the little Doctor has
rendered me.  So," he added, "the Doctor took the copy to your father?"

"Yes.  He had previously, through Mr Farquhar, consulted my father
regarding the half-burnt fragments in his possession.  But the other day
he came, bearing the full document, which they discussed for a couple of
hours or more.  Now, Mr Mullet," she said, "you have been a very good
and kind friend to me; therefore, I'm wondering if you would render us a
further service?"

"Anything in my power I will most willingly do," replied the _blase_
man, seeking permission to light his cigarette.

"I first want to know," she exclaimed, "who is that blackguard who came
here and demanded to know my father's business?"

"He's a person of whom you need have no concern," was his evasive reply.

"But he possesses a copy of the statement by Professor Holmboe?"

"He does.  And he has instituted an active search in which three of the
greatest scholars on the Continent are assisting, in order to ascertain
the key to the cipher alleged by the Russian professor to exist in the
prophecy of Ezekiel."

"But does he possess any manuscript of the Professor's relating to the
cipher?" inquired the girl, eagerly.

"Ah! that I do not know," was his answer, "as far as I'm aware, he does
not."

"Nothing definite has yet been ascertained, I suppose?"

"Nothing actually definite," he said.  "But you can tell your father
that Erich Haupt believes that at last he has struck the right line of
inquiry."

"Haupt!" she repeated.  "Who is he?"

"Your father will know him as the great professor of Leipzig.  He is now
staying at the Waldorf Hotel."

"But--well, Mr Mullet," she said with some hesitation.  "Pardon me for
saying so, but your friends seem a very unscrupulous and remarkable
lot."

"And they are just as influential as they are unscrupulous," he laughed.
Then growing serious next moment, he added with a sigh, "Ah!  Miss
Gwen, if you only knew all, you'd realise how very delighted I'd be to
cut myself adrift from such a rascally association."

"Why don't you?" she asked, looking straight into his eyes.  "This
business of the treasure of Israel is surely a big and lucrative one.
Why don't you leave them, and join my father, Mr Farquhar, and Doctor
Diamond?"

"Well--shall I tell you the truth, Miss Griffin?" he asked, blowing a
cloud of smoke from his lips as he contemplated the red end of his
cigarette, "Because--well, because I dare not!"

"Dare not?"

"No," he said in a strained voice.  "You see my part has not been an
altogether blameless one.  Need I explain more than to say that very
often, for my very bread, I have to depend upon these persons who are
working against your father."

The girl sighed, a painful expression crossing her brow.

"I wish I could help you, Mr Mullet," she said seriously.  "Can't you
possibly disassociate yourself from those scoundrels?"

He shook his head sadly.

The next instant she turned towards the door exclaiming:

"Hark!  What was that?  I heard a noise!"

"Nothing," he laughed.  "The window of the next room is open a little,
and the wind has blown the door to."

By this, she was reassured, even though she feared that the horrid
red-faced man whose name he refused to tell her, might again reappear
there as her inquisitor.

"It seems to me," she said, "that your friends, whoever they are, are
dishonourable men whose bread you are compelled to eat.  Surely you are
in a position quite as wretched as I am?"

"Yes," he admitted.  "But do me one favour, Miss Gwen.  Never breathe to
a soul that I've handed the copy of that document to the Doctor.  If
they knew that, they would never forgive me."

"I will remain silent, and I'll tell my father also to regard your
action as confidential."

"Tell Mr Farquhar also," he urged.

"Ah!" sighed the girl.  "Unfortunately I never see him now.  He always
meets my father at the Royal Societies Club--in order to avoid me."

"Then there is an actual breach between you?"

"Yes," she replied hoarsely.  "He asked me certain questions, to which I
could not reply without betraying you."

"And you risked your love for a worthless fellow like myself!"

"Well?  And did you not risk your liberty for my sake?" she asked.  "Did
you not protect me from that blackguard who would have struck me because
I refused to answer his questions?"

"Oh, that was nothing, Miss Gwen.  I am thinking of you."

"Can you--will you assist my father?" she urged.  "For myself I care
nothing.  But for my father's reputation--in order to enhance it, and
also that through him Israel shall recover her sacred relics, I am ready
to sacrifice anything.  Disassociate yourself from these men, and assist
us, Mr Mullet.  Do."

"That is, alas! impossible," was his slow response.  "It would mean my
instant ruin.  Would it not be better if I remained in the enemy's camp?
Reflect for a moment."

"I wish you could meet my father," she said.

"Well, if he'd really like to see me, perhaps I might call upon him."

"He wants so much to know you.  He was only saying so when we sat
together last night after dinner."

"But you know, Miss Gwen, I'm not the sort of man that he would care to
associate with."

"You have been my friend and protector, Mr Mullet, and surely that is
sufficient I have always found you a gentleman--more so than many others
who pose as honest men."

"Well," he said.  "I don't pose.  I've told you the simple truth."

"And I admire you for it.  You once said you'd tell me all about your
own little daughter."

He was silent for a moment, and she saw she had touched a tender chord
in his memory.

"I'll tell you about little Aggie one day; not now, please, Miss
Griffin."

"Well, tell me, then, why your friends are so antagonistic towards my
father?"

"For several reasons.  One is that the man you don't like--the one with
the red-face--is a fierce hater of the Jewish race.  His own avarice
knows no bounds, and he has sworn to recover the treasure of Israel if
it still exists and when recovered he will break up and melt the sacred
vessels and destroy the sacred relies in order to exhibit to the Jews
his malice and his power."

"Why, it would be disgraceful to desecrate such objects--even though he
is a Gentile."

"Certainly.  But your father's known leaning towards the Jews--his
friendship with certain Rabbis, and the assistance he has once or twice
rendered the Jewish community in London, have aroused the ire of this
man, who is now his bitterest and most unscrupulous opponent."

"Then you can assist us, Mr Mullet--if you will."

"I fear that is impossible--certainly not openly," was his reply.
"Personally, I would not lift a finger to help one whose fixed idea is
despoliation and desecration of the sacred objects.  My sympathies, my
dear Miss Gwen, are entirely with you in your own unfortunate position,
and with your father in his strenuous efforts to discover the key to
this cipher, and afterwards place the expedition to Palestine upon a
firm business basis, the most sacred treasures to be handed over to
their rightful owners, the Jews."

"Why does this man, whose name you refuse to tell me, so hate the Jews?"

"Because, in certain of his huge financial dealings, they have actually
ousted him by their shrewdness combined with honesty," he answered.  "It
has ever been, and still is, the accepted fashion to cast opprobrium
upon the Jews.  Yet, in my varied career, I have often found a Jew more
honest than a Christian, and certainly he never hides dishonesty beneath
a cloak of religion in which he does not believe, as do so many of your
so-called Christians in the City."

"Then you are, like my father, an admirer of the Hebrew race?" she said,
rather surprised.

"I am.  In them as a class I find no cant or hypocrisy, no humbug of
their clerical life as we have it, alas! apparent so often in our own
churches, while among the Jews themselves a helpful hand is outstretched
everywhere.  They settle their own quarrels in their own courts of law
and they adhere strictly to their religious teaching.  Of course, there
are good and bad Jews, as there are good and bad Christians.  But with
the anti-Jewish feeling so apparent everywhere throughout Europe, I have
nothing in common."

"And because of that, Mr Mullet, you will assist us--won't you?" she
urged.

The red-haired adventurer hesitated.

CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

IN WHICH A DESPERATE GAME IS PLAYED.

"To serve you, Miss Gwen, and to return a favour to my friend the
Doctor, I'll keep you informed of what transpires on our side," he
promised at last.  "I'd like to call and see your father.  When's the
best time?"

"He will be pleased to see you at any time you may appoint!  Why not
ring me up on the telephone--if you are not able to make an appointment
now?"

"Very well," he replied, "I will."

He saw that she wanted to ask him something, but was hesitating, as
though not daring to put her question.

At last she asked:

"Mr Mullet, will you not reveal to me in confidence who it is who is
thus working against us?"

"A person of highest reputation as far as financial reputation in London
goes, and of enormous influence.  He has at his service every power that
wealth can command."

"And is he nameless?"

"Alas! he must be," was "Red Mullet's" decisive answer.  The truth was
that he feared to tell the girl, lest her surprise might lead her to
expose the secret, which must at once reflect upon herself.  He was glad
that she had not recognised Challas from the many photographs which so
constantly appeared in the illustrated papers.

A door somewhere in the small flat clicked again, but neither took any
notice of it, attributing it to the wind from the open window.

They had no suspicion of an eavesdropper who had silently entered after
them with the latch-key he possessed, and had just as silently left
again, and crept down the stairs.

"Miss Gwen," exclaimed her friend a few moments later, "I would really
urge you to have a care of yourself.  Your enemies evidently mean
mischief.  You have, by a blackguardly ruse, been parted from the man
you love--hence you are defenceless."

"Except for you--my true friend."

"I may have to leave London suddenly, while at any moment, you may, if
you are not careful, fall again into the net they will, no doubt, spread
and cleverly conceal.  They fear your father and his friends, and from
him will demand a price for you--a price for your honour, most likely."

"What do you mean?" she cried, starting, and staring at him.

"I am compelled to speak frankly, Miss Gwen; please forgive me," he
said.  "I know these men, remember.  I know they will hesitate at
nothing in order to gain their dastardly ends.  They will compel your
father to pay the price--and it will be the relinquishing of the
struggle, and the leaving of it to them."

"We will never relinquish it!" declared the girl.  "But do have a care
of yourself," urged the man with the bristly moustache in deep
earnestness.  "If you again fall into the hands of these two men, you
will not, I fear, escape without disaster."

"I know that, alas! only too well.  I owe everything to your kindness
and the pity you had for me.  How can I ever sufficiently repay you?"

"You are now repairing me--repaying me with all you love most dearly.
Your silence has cost you your lover."

She sighed, and hot tears rose to her splendid eyes.  He was quick to
notice her sudden change, and deftly turned the conversation into a
different channel.

Then, when he had smoked another cigarette, chatting the while, he
reminded her to tell her father of Erich Haupt, and to say that he, "Red
Mullet", would call on the following day.

At last they descended together into the street, and at the corner of
Oxford Street entered into a taxi-cab in which they drove back to
Notting Hill Gate station.

There he raised his hat as she descended and hurried across into
Pembridge Gardens, while he gave the man directions to return to his own
chambers.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, aloud, as they went along the Bayswater Road
with the horn "honking."

"The whole situation is now a terribly complicated one.  To throw in my
lot with the Professor and his daughter would mean a `stretch' for me,
without a doubt.  Challas is vindictive, because I allowed her to escape
from his infernal clutches.  He meant to serve her the same as he did
that poor young German girl!  Hang me!  I may be an outsider, but I'm
not going to stand by and see another woman fall a victim.  Now what is
the best game to play in the interests of Griffin and Diamond?  Stand
by, watch old Erich, and if he gets hold of anything tangible, give it
to them at once.  That's the only way that I can see.  Yet--yet I may
already be suspected of playing a double game--and if I am, it means
that I'll be given away to the police at the first opportunity.  No," he
added with great bitterness, "in this game Felix Challas and Jim
Jannaway hold all the cards.  Money talks here, and it does always," he
sighed.

And he sat back in his cab in a deep reverie.  Already he was tired of
London, though he had not set foot in it for three years.  He was too
near Challas.  When absent on the Continent, he simply obeyed orders,
and led the easy-going life of the cosmopolitan concession-hunter,
always well-dressed, always apparently flush of money, always merry and
prosperous-looking, and always outwardly, at least, presenting the
appearance of a gentleman.

Here, in London, however, he was simply the cat's-paw of an unscrupulous
parvenu who cloaked his evil doings beneath the remarkable sanctity and
generous philanthropy.

"It's a blackguardly shame that poor little Gwen, a smart little girl
and yet sweet and innocent as a child, should be parted from her lover
like this!" he went on, still murmuring to himself.  "No doubt this man
Farquhar, whoever he is, doubts her.  I'd do the same if the girl to
whom I was engaged ran away from home, stayed away a few days, and then
on her return refused to give any account of herself.  Frank Farquhar
isn't a fool, and I admire him for that.  I'm to blame for the whole
thing," he added with a bitter imprecation, "because I'm a coward and
fear nowadays to face the music.  Yes," he went on, "Red Mullet is in
fear of his enemies!  It's no good denying it.  Hitherto he's always
defied them, even at the muzzle of a gun!  But recently they've become
just one too many for him!"

He paused and lit a cigarette.  Then with a sudden gesture of despair he
asked himself aloud: "How can I assist the little girl to get back her
lover?  Frank Farquhar is a good fellow, I've discovered.  And he's
devoted to her.  How can I compel him to believe in her?"

When he entered his chambers, he flung himself again into the armchair
in which Gwen had sat.

"It would be a cursed shame if ever the sacred relics of Israel fell
into the hands of such a blackguardly hypocrite as Challas.  What does
he care for their antiquity, or their religious significance?  Nothing.
The gold he'd melt down and sell at its market value per ounce, while
the sacred objects of the Holy of Holies he would wantonly destroy, in
face of the Jews and in order to laugh them to scorn.  He shan't do
that!  By Heaven! he shan't.  If the treasure is still there it shall be
recovered by the Doctor and Griffin.  I'll help them, and I'll still
remain little Gwen's protector, even if it costs me my liberty to do so.
Besides--"

His fierce words of determination were interrupted by a ring at the
front door bell, and he went along the small hall to open it.

Jim Jannaway, in a light overcoat and crush hat, stood upon the mat.

"By Jove, Charlie!" he cried, "I'm jolly glad you're at home, old chap!"

"Why?" asked Mullet admitting him, and closing the door.

"Well, my dear fellow," he said in a breathless voice.  "Something ugly
has happened.  You've been given away.  Somebody has recognised that
you're back in London!"

"Who?" gasped the red-haired man.

"Ah! that we don't know yet.  The `boss' has just sent me round to tell
you to clear out at once--this instant!"

"H'm," remarked "Red Mullet."  "Now that's deuced funny!  Why didn't he
keep his fears to himself, and let me take the consequences--eh?"

"Why, of course he wouldn't do that.  He never lets us down--you surely
know him too well for that," remarked the other.

"And he gives me the tip to clear out!" said Charlie Mullet.  "It's
really very kind and considerate of him."

"Well, my dear fellow.  You don't seem to appreciate his kindness very
much."

"I never appreciate the solicitude of my enemies, my dear Jim," he
replied with perfect nonchalance.  "It's my failing, I suppose."

Jannaway disregarded the sarcasm, and said:

"I was with him only half an hour ago round in Berkeley Square, and he
told me to come along at once to you, and urge you to get away.  He gave
me these for you," and from his pocket he produced three thousand-franc
notes.

"My dear Jim, both you and Felix seem to take me for a silly mug,"
laughed Red Mullet defiantly, "but you must please remember that I've
been mug-hunting too long to be bluffed like this.  The exemplary
Baronet is desirous that I should leave London, and sends you, his
emissary, to give me timely warning.  Well, my dear boy.  I want no
warning," he said, for he was now on his mettle.  "I shall simply remain
here.  If they send anybody from Scotland Yard--well, here's a drink for
them," and he indicated the tantalus and glasses upon a side table.

"But surely you don't wish to remain here, and give the whole game
away!" cried Jannaway, anxiously, standing in the centre of the room,
his hat pushed slightly to the back of his head.

"What does it matter to me?  I never move without just cause.  I'm
growing rather sceptical in my old age.  What proof have I of this
extraordinary _contretemps_?"

"What proof do you want?  I'm here to warn you.  Are you a fool,
Charlie?"

"Yes.  Until I know why this warning has been given me.  How does Felix
know?"

"He has a pal down at Scotland Yard--a sergeant whom he helped `over the
stile' a few years ago.  He gives him valuable tips sometimes.  One of
them is that you've been recognised, and that the warrant has been given
for your arrest to-night."

"Ah, my boy," replied "Red Mullet," lighting a fresh cigarette without
turning a hair, "that's really interesting.  And if I go down to Bow
Street depend upon it I shan't go alone.  So you can just go back to
Berkeley Square, and tell Felix what I say."

"Why--what's the matter with you to-night, Charlie?" asked the other,
looking at him in surprise.

What could the man know, he wondered?  He seemed to scent the betrayal
intended as soon as he was across the Channel.

"Matter?" he echoed.  "Why, my dear Jim, I merely keep my eyes skinned,
that's all."

"And you refuse to heed Felix's warning?"

"Yes, I'm very comfortable at home here--and here I mean to stay.  Let
the police come along if they like and I'll entertain them with a very
interesting story.  They re fond of hearing stories from men like
myself, Jim."

"What the devil is the matter with you!" cried Jannaway, turning upon
him fiercely.

"Nothing, I'm only surprised to find you such a fool, Jim.  I thought
better of you," was the other's calm response.  "Do you know," he added,
"you people who live in London want the moss scraped off you.  We boys
on the Continent are a lot sharper.  We see the word danger written up,
even when it's beyond the horizon and the detective is still off the
map.  You people here deliberately run your heads into nooses."

"How?"

"Well, you and Felix have arranged the little loop for yourselves in
this affair, my dear boy.  So do go home and sleep on it," he laughed
merrily.

"You're a fool!" declared the other, turning from him impatiently.

"Of course.  I'm a fool for not falling into the very clever trap which
Sir Felix Challas and his sharp `cat's-paw', Jim Jannaway, have laid for
me," he answered, looking the fellow straight in the face.

"Bah!  All this quarrel arises over a girl--a little chit of a girl who,
after all, hasn't much of a reputation to lose."

"And to whom do you refer, pray?" asked Charlie, indignantly.

"To Griffin's girl, of course--the girl who was with you so long in
these chambers, and whom you pretended to regard with such paternal
care," he sneered.

"You cast a slur upon the poor girl who was your victim!" cried the
red-haired man angrily.

"I cast no slur.  I speak the truth."

"Then you're an accursed liar!" cried Mullet, angrily.  "Having failed
to entrap her, you come here to-night to try and have me!  But your ruse
is a little bit too thin!  Let the police come and learn from me the
truth concerning our beautiful Birthday Baronet!  I'll welcome them.  So
first go back with my compliments to Berkeley Square."

"Then your intention, now you're in danger, is to give us away--eh?"
exclaimed Jannaway, now flushed and excited.  And in a second he had
snatched up a heavy bronze ornament from the mantelshelf, intending to
bring it down upon the other's head with a blow that must have crushed
him.

In an instant, however, Mullet was on his guard.  He was not a man to be
taken by surprise.

"Now put that down at once, Jim, and clear out of my rooms," he cried,
and Jannaway found himself looking down the plated barrel of a
serviceable-looking Smith-Wesson revolver.

"Curse you!" cried the man, and he cast the ornament heavily upon the
floor.

"My dear Jim," said the other, "the best place for you would really be
on the Continent.  You would learn wisdom, and would never attempt a
bluff on a pal like this.  You can't attempt a four-flush with me, you
know.  So first go back to the `Birthday Money-Spinner' and tell him
`Red Mullet's' decision is to remain in London, and if necessary--to
tell Scotland Yard the tale!"

"But--"

"Curse you!  There are no buts!" cried Red Mullet, his eyes now flashing
with anger while he held his revolver straight at his enemy's head.
"Out of my rooms with you, or by Gad!  I'll plug you!  I see through
your clever little game.  Once I'm over there, then you'd send me to
prison without the least compunction--because I let the girl slip
through your blackguardly fingers.  But no more gas.  I mean business
to-night.  Out you go--and quick!"

"You wouldn't say this if I had a gun!" remarked Jannaway between his
teeth.

"I care less for your gun than I do for you, my dear boy," laughed "Red
Mullet;" "go back to Challas, and tell him that to-night he's tried to
bluff the wrong man, and that he'll have to pay heavily for losing the
game."

"You talk like an idiot."

"And you've acted as one.  Out and begone!"

And the man who, when he had entered, believed that he held all the
honours in the game, was compelled to walk slowly out beneath the
threatening muzzle of the weapon, cowed and vanquished.

"And now, Jim Jannaway!"  Mullet cried, when he was on the threshold,
"send your detectives along as soon as you like, for I'll go to bed in
an hour, and if they come afterwards I shan't admit them.  Understand
that?  Good-night and bad luck to you!"  And with a laugh he slammed the
door.

Then he held his breath, and stood staring straight before him,
wondering whether that bold action had not been his own undoing.

CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

EXPLAINS FRANK'S ATTITUDE.

Christmas had passed, the New Year had been welcomed, its advent quickly
forgotten, and London now lay dark and fog-bound in the yellow gloomy
days of mid-January.

As far as Professor Griffin was concerned, little had occurred.  His
surprise when Gwen had told him of Erich Haupt being interested in the
investigation of the secret was unbounded, and he had taken a cab at
once to the Waldorf Hotel.  He was anxious to meet the great German
scholar, but was disappointed to learn that he had suddenly left the
hotel on the previous night for the Continent.

Once again was he prevented from meeting the man who was working in
opposition to him, even though he was now aware of his identity.

It puzzled him, as it also puzzled Diamond and Gwen, to know who was
behind the German scholar.  That there was some one was evident from
what the girl had admitted.  But his identity was still kept a profound
secret.

Gwen had expected to be rung up on the telephone by Mullet, but having
waited for three anxious days, found his number in the telephone
directory and rang him up.  She did so on four different occasions, but
on each the response from the exchange was the same.  "No reply."

What could have happened?

Was it possible that he could have left hurriedly for the Continent?
She recollected how he had told her that perhaps he would be compelled,
by force of circumstances, to leave London, and leave her alone.  She
wrote him a brief note, and posted it, hoping that it might be forwarded
to him.

Then she had waited--for nearly four long weeks.

Doctor Diamond came up from Horsford on several occasions, but the
interviews he had with the Professor carried them no further.  The key
to the cipher was still an enigma which none could solve.

Griffin's one thought was of Erich Haupt.  He had returned to the
Continent.  Perhaps he was hot upon a solution of the tantalising
problem.

In those four weeks, with the interval of a dreary Christmas spent alone
with her father, nothing startling had occurred.  The estrangement had
driven Frank Farquhar to distraction.  Jealousy had caused him to think
ill of the girl he so dearly loved, and in order to try and forget, he
had gone South for a week or so at Monte Carlo.  But as soon as he
stepped inside the Hotel de Paris, he had longed to be back again at
Gwen's side in Pembridge Gardens.  The smart women he saw in their white
serge gowns, golden chatelaines, and picture hats, all nauseated him.
Of the lilies of France, none were half so fair as his own sweet English
rose.  Christmas he had spent with a big and merry house-party up in the
Highlands, but the gaiety of it all bored him to death, and at last,
when he returned in the New Year, he had, after a severe struggle with
himself, driven down to Notting Hill Gate, and again bowed over the soft
little hand of the girl whose wonderful eyes held him in such complete
fascination.

For Gwen, that evening was a never-to-be-forgotten one.

She was seated by the fire at the further end of the study buried in the
big saddle-bag chair with a book, while her father was busily writing,
when the maid announced the young man's arrival.

She held her breath.  Her heart gave a great bound, and then stopped and
she sat rigid, her face blanched, her hands grasping the arms of the
chair.

She heard his well-known voice, and rising slowly, faced him without a
word.

And he, without a word also, took her hand, bowing gallantly over it.

Then, with a half-timid look into her pretty face, he stammered:

"I--I've been wondering, Gwen, how you've been all this time.  I've been
away, first at Monte Carlo and afterwards up in Scotland.  How did you
spend your Christmas?"

"Well--it was not very exciting," she laughed, "was it, dad?"

"No, my dear," replied the old man, "I fear it was a very very dull time
for you."

Her lover glanced at her, and she saw by the expression of his eyes that
he was full of genuine regret.  That absence had, indeed, caused both
their hearts to yearn for each other.  He had, alas! been too hasty, he
declared within himself.  Would she ever forgive him?  Would she ever
allow him to kiss her again upon the lips?

Before her father his greeting was, of necessity, a somewhat formal one;
besides, he was compelled to sit and discuss with him the present
situation, and ask his opinion as to the next move in the game.

"The possession of a complete copy of Holmboe's statement has carried us
a good deal further.  Professor," he said, "but how are we now to act?"

"I really don't know, my dear Farquhar," was the elder man's response,
as he rubbed his big round glasses.

"I only wish this man Mullet would tell Diamond a little more," he
sighed.  "We ought to discover who is directing the opposition against
us."

"That's just where we are so completely handicapped.  We're handicapped
in two directions," said the Professor.  "First, we remain in ignorance
of the identity of our enemy, and secondly we are at a loss to discover
the key to the cipher.  We now know the truth concerning the Russian's
discovery, and naturally we are beckoned on to see what more may be
added to the mental outfit of our religion and our civilisation, by
recovering the sacred treasures that yet remain.  The occasional
excavations scattered through the last two centuries in Palestine,
Egypt, Rome and Assyria, have shown but a fraction of all that has to be
done.  Such a prospect is most attractive, and if we could but find the
key to the cipher the interest of the whole Jewish race would instantly
be stimulated, and we should certainly not lack funds for the
expedition, the purchase of the land in question, and the necessary
excavations.  It would be a great undertaking of international
co-operation, but no loophole must be allowed for vandalism and
wrecking, of which we have so much evidence in the past few centuries.
Such wrecking is, alas! by no means unknown, even down to our day.  The
Department of Antiquities in Egypt, for instance, at the present moment,
sells the right to dig up and destroy all the Roman buildings in Egypt
at so much per thousand bricks removed by the speculators!  We must
allow no such sort of speculation with the treasures of Israel."

"I take it, Professor, that our opponents are anti-Semitics of the most
pronounced type," said Farquhar.  "At least, so the Doctor informs me.
Once it is in their hand their chief object will be to destroy the
sacred relics, and melt down the golden vessels.  Diamond says, that
according to his information, those working against us are rich, and
have no need of gain.  The whole of their energies are directed towards
an anti-Semitic demonstration--one that would convulse the whole
civilised world."

"We will not allow it, Farquhar!" cried the old Hebrew scholar, bringing
his hand down heavily upon his writing-table.  "I am not a Jew, but
while it remains within my power I will never allow the sacred relics of
Israel to be desecrated."

"If they exist," added Gwen from the depths of her armchair.

"They do exist!" exclaimed her father, "of that I now feel quite
convinced.  At first I was very sceptical, but I have spent many weeks
in close and ardent study, and my first opinion is now greatly
modified."

"And you anticipate that we shall one day gain a knowledge of the mode
of reaching that cipher record?" asked Frank, eagerly.

"I fervently hope so," was the elder man's response.  "I hope so in the
interests of the Hebrew race.  As soon as I write my article in the
_Contemporary_ or in the _Jewish Chronicle_, the world will instantly be
agog."

"But until you have read the hidden message for yourself you will write
nothing?" remarked Farquhar.

"Of course not.  We must closely preserve the secret for the present.
Not a soul must know, or Holmboe's discovery will most certainly get to
the ears of some enterprising journalist.  Why, we'd be having one of
your papers, Frank, sending out an expedition in search of the Ark of
the Covenant!" he laughed.  "And that would surely be fatal."

Farquhar held his breath for a few seconds.

"Why fatal, Professor?" he asked, for it was at the bade of his head to
suggest to Sir George the advisability of despatching an expedition when
the time was ripe.

"Fatal to the scheme as well as to the newspaper," was the elder man's
response.  "Even you modern journalists cannot make money by exploiting
sacred relics of such importance."

"No, but we could investigate for the benefit of the Hebrew race.  We
sorely would not lose prestige by that?"

"Yes, you would.  No Jew, or even Christian for that matter, would ever
believe that a newspaper defrayed the cost of an expedition out of pure
regard for the interests of the Hebrew faith."  He laughed.  "The public
know too well that a `boom' means to a newspaper increased circulation,
and, therefore, increased income.  Before these days of the yellow
journalism, the press was supposed to be above such ruses; but now the
public receives the journalistic `boom' with its tongue in its cheek."

"You're quite right, Professor, quite right!" remarked Frank, for the
first time realising that to "work" the treasure of Israel as a "boom"
for his group of newspapers and periodicals was impossible.  "I've only
regarded it from the business side, and not from the sentimental.  I see
now that any newspaper touching it would be treading dangerous ground,
and might at once wound religious susceptibilities."

"I'm glad you've seen it in that light!" replied the old scholar,
stroking his grey hair.  "As far as I can discern, the best mode of
procedure--providing of course, that we can discover the key number to
the numerical cipher--is for me to write an article in the
_Contemporary_ with a view to obtaining the financial assistance of the
Jewish community.  I know the Jew well enough to be confident, that all,
from the Jew pedlar in the East End to the family of Rothschild itself,
would unite in assisting to discover the sacred treasures of the
Temple."  And for half an hour or so they chatted, until Frank was able
to slip away with Gwen into the drawing-room where, without a single
word, he clasped her in his arms passionately and kissed her upon the
lips.

He held her closely pressed to his breast, as he stroked her soft hair
tenderly, and looked into those wide-open, trustful eyes.  Surely that
frank expression of true and abiding love could not be feigned!  There
is, in a true woman's eyes, a love-look that cannot lie!  He saw it, and
was at once satisfied.

In a low voice he begged forgiveness for misjudging her, repeating his
great and unbounded affection.  She heard his quick strained voice, and
listened to his heartfelt words, and then, unable to restrain her joy at
his return, her head fell upon his shoulders, and she burst into tears.

She was his, she whispered, still his--and his alone.

And he held her sobbing in his strong arms, as his hand still stroked
her hair and his lips again bent until they touched her fair white brow
in fierce and passionate caress.

CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

DESCRIBES CERTAIN CURIOUS EVENTS.

Has it never struck you that this twentieth century of ours is the
essential age of the very young girl?

Supreme to-day reigns the young woman between the age of--well say from
sixteen to twenty--who dresses her hair with a parting and a pigtail,
wears short skirts, displays a neat ankle, and persists in remaining in
her teens.  Grumpy old fossils tell us that this species is a product of
an advanced state of civilisation which insists that everything must be
new, from a dish of _peches a la Melba_ to the tint of that eternal
hoarding in front of Buckingham Palace.  One can only suppose that they
are correct.  Ours is a go-ahead age which scoffs at the horse, and
pokes fun at the South-Eastern Railway, which forsakes Saturday concerts
for football, yet delights in talking-machines.

Is it any wonder therefore that the statuesque beauty and the skittish
matron of a year ago no longer finds herself in demand for
supper-parties, Sandown or Henley?  No, she must nowadays stand aside,
and watch the reign of her little sister who dashes off from the theatre
to the Savoy in a motor-brougham still wearing her ribbon bow on her
pigtail, much as she did in the schoolroom.

The young of certain species of wild fowl are termed "flappers," and
some irreverent and irascible old gentleman has applied that term to the
go-ahead young miss of to-day.  Though most women over twenty-one may
attempt to disguise the fact, it is plain that the young girl just
escaped from the schoolroom now reigns supreme.  Her dynasty is at its
zenith.  She is the ruling factor of London life.  Peers of the realm,
foreign potentates, hard-bitten soldiers from the East, magnates from
Park Lane all hurry to her beck and call.  The girl in the pigtail and
short skirt rides over them all roughshod.  And what is the result of
all this adulation upon the dimple-faced little girl herself?  In the
majority of cases, I fear it results in making her a stuck-up, _blase_
and conceited little prig, for she nowadays takes upon herself a glory
and exalted position to which she is entirely unsuited, but which she
has been taught to consider hers by right.

Gwen Griffin was a perfect type of the very young girl, courted, petted
and flattered by all the men of her acquaintance.  Having no mother to
forbid her, she was fond of going motor-rides and fond of flirtation,
but through it all she had, fortunately, never developed any of those
objectionable traits so common in girls of her age.  She had managed to
remain quite simple, sweet and unaffected through it all, and six months
before, when she had found the man she could honestly love, she had cut
her male friends and entered upon life with all seriousness.

A week had gone by, and Frank had called every evening.  Once he had
taken her to dine at the Carlton, and on to the theatre afterwards, for
now they had, by tacit though unspoken consent, agreed that all bygones
should be bygones.

Often he felt himself wondering what had been the real cause of her
mysterious absence from home, yet when such suspicions arose within him,
he quickly put them aside.  How could he possibly doubt her love?

The Doctor was back again at Horsford, leading the same rural uneventful
life as before, but daily studying everything that had any possible
bearing upon the assertion of Professor Holmboe.

Frank came down to visit Lady Gavin one day, and as a matter of course
was very soon seated with the ugly little man in his cottage home.

Diamond, over a cigar, was relating the result of his most recent
studies, and lamenting that they were still as far from obtaining a
knowledge of the actual cipher as ever.

"Yes," murmured the young man with a sigh, "I'm much afraid that old
Haupt will get ahead of us--even if he has not already done so.  How is
it that you can't get your friend Mullet to assist us further?"

"He has left London, I believe.  He disappeared quite suddenly from his
rooms, and curiously enough, has sent me no word."

"You hinted once that he's a `crook.'  If so, he may have fled on
account of awkward police inquiries--eh?"

"Most likely.  Yet it's strange that he hasn't sent me news of his
whereabouts."

"Not at all, my dear Doctor," responded the other.  "If a man is in
hiding, it isn't likely that he's going to give away his place of
concealment, is it?"

"But he trusts me--trusts me implicitly," declared Diamond.

"That may be so.  But he doesn't trust other persons into whose hands
his letter might possibly fall.  The police have a nasty habit of
watching the correspondence of the friend of the man wanted, you know."

"Perhaps you're right, Mr Farquhar," said the Doctor, with a heavy
expression upon his broad brow.  "The more I study the problem of the
treasure of Israel, the more bewildered I become," he went on.  "Now as
regards the original of the Old Testament, it is not all written in
Hebrew, I find.  Certain parts are in Aramaic, often erroneously called
Chaldee.  [From Daniel, ii, 4, to vii, 28; Ezra iv, 8, to vi, 18; vii,
11 to 26; and Jeremiah x and xi.]  Again, we have a difficulty to face
which even Professor Griffin had never yet mentioned to me.  It is this.
On the very lowest estimate, the Old Testament must represent a
literary activity of fully a thousand years, and therefore it is but
reasonable to suppose that the language of the earlier works would be
considerably different from that of the later; while, on other grounds,
the possible existence of local dialects might be expected to show
itself in diversity of diction among the various books.  But, curiously
enough--though I am handicapped by not being acquainted with the Hebrew
tongue--all the authorities I have consulted agree that neither of those
surmises find much verification in our extant Hebrew text."

"I've always understood that," Frank remarked.  "Yes.  I've been reading
deeply, Mr Farquhar.  Curiously enough the most ancient documents and
the youngest are remarkably similar in the general cast of their
language, and certainly show nothing corresponding in the difference
between Homer and Plato, or Chaucer and Shakespeare.  Though we know
that the Ephraimites could not give the proper (Gileadite) sound of the
letter _shin_ in _Shibboleth_, [Judges, xii 8] yet all attempts to
distinguish dialects in our extant books have failed."

"I think," said Farquhar, "that such remarkable uniformity, while
testifying to the comparative stability of the language, is in part to
be explained by the hypothesis of a continuous process of revision and
perhaps modernising of the documents, which may have gone on until well
into our era."

"Exactly," remarked the Doctor, "yet in spite of this levelling tendency
there appear to remain certain diversities, particularly in the
vocabulary, which have not been eliminated, and these serve to
distinguish two great periods in the history of the language, sometimes
called the gold and silver ages, respectively, roughly separated by the
return from the exile.  To the former belong, without doubt, the older
strata in the Hexateuch, and the greater prophets; to the latter, almost
as indubitably, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ecclesiastes and Daniel, all
of which use a considerable mixture of Aramaic of Persian words.  Then,
the great question for us is whether the ancient text of Ezekiel
preserved in St Petersburg is an original, or a modernised version.  If
the latter, much of the cipher, perhaps all, must have been destroyed!"

"I quite follow your argument, my dear Diamond," Farquhar replied, "but
has not Holmboe established to his own satisfaction that the cipher
still exists in the manuscript in question?  He has, therefore, proved
it to be an exact copy of the original--if not the original itself."

"Experts all agree that it cannot be the original," declared the Doctor.
"It is quite true that Holmboe alleges that the cipher exists, and
gives quotations from it.  Yet now that I have been reading deeply I
have become a trifle sceptical.  I'm anxious for Griffin to discover the
key number, and prove it for himself.  Personally, I entertain some
doubt about the present text of Ezekiel being the actual text of the
prophet."

"That can only be proved by the test of the cipher," was Farquhar's
reply.  "If you accept any part of the dead man's declaration, you must
surely accept the whole."

"I have all along accepted the whole--just as Griffin accepts it."

"Then why entertain any doubt in this direction?  The Professor has
never mentioned it, which shows us that there is no need why we should
query it."

"Yes, but may not the fact of the text having been modernised be the
reason of Griffin's non-success in discovering the key number?"

"Holmboe discovered it," remarked the other, "therefore, I see no reason
why Griffin--with Holmboe's statement before him and in addition that
scrap of manuscript which evidently relates to the key--should not be
equally successful."

"Ah!" sighed the ugly little man whose fidgety movements showed his
increasing anxiety, "if we could but know what the old German was
doing--or in what direction he is working."

"He's not back at his own home.  I received a telegram from our Leipzig
correspondent only yesterday.  His whereabouts is just as mysterious as
that of your friend Mullet.  By the way--would he never tell you who
were the principals in this opposition to us?"

"No, he has always steadily refused."

"Some shady characters, perhaps--men whom he is compelled to shield,
eh?"

"I think so," answered the Doctor.  "I wanted him to stand in with us,
but he's a strange fellow, for though he promised to help me, he refused
to participate in any part of the profit."

"Has some compunction in betraying his friends, evidently," laughed
Frank.  "I'm very anxious to meet him.  He promised to call on Griffin,
but has never done so."

"He's been put on his guard, and cleared out, that's my candid opinion.
`Red Mullet' is a splendid fellow, but a very slippery customer, as the
police know too well.  He's probably half-way across the world by this
time.  He's a very rapid traveller.  I've sometimes had letters from him
from a dozen different cities in as many days."

"To move rapidly is always incumbent upon the adventurer, if he is to be
successful in eluding awkward inquiry.  He never writes to the child, I
suppose?"  Frank asked, as Aggie at that moment passed the window.

"Oh, yes, very often.  But he always encloses her letter to me.  He
never gives his address to her, for fear, I suppose, that it should fall
into other hands.  I wired to his rooms in Paris a week ago, but, as
yet, have received no response.  His rooms in London are closed.  I was
up there on Thursday.  Why he keeps them on when he's away for years at
a time, I can never understand."

"Probably sub-lets them, as so many fellows do," Farquhar suggested,
"yet it's unfortunate we can't get into touch with him."

"Miss Griffin is acquainted with him--I wonder if she knows his
whereabouts?" remarked Diamond quite innocently.

"She knows him!"  Frank echoed in surprise.  "Are you quite sure of
that?"

"Quite.  She told me so."

"How could she know a man who is admittedly an outsider?" asked Frank.

"My dear Mr Farquhar," he laughed, "your modern girl makes many
undesirable acquaintances, especially a pretty go-ahead girl of Miss
Griffin's type."

Frank bit his lip.  This friendship of Gwen's with the man Mullet
annoyed him.  What could she possibly know of such a man?  He resolved
to speak to her about it, and make inquiry into the circumstances of
their acquaintance.

He must warn her to have nothing to do with a man of such evil
reputation, he thought.  Little did he dream that this very man whom the
world denounced as an outsider had stood the girl's best and most
devoted friend.

He walked back along the village street to the Manor, and dressed for
dinner, his mind full of dark forebodings.

What would be the end?  What could it be, except triumph for those
enemies, the very names of whom were, with such tantalising persistency,
withheld.

Half an hour after he had left the Doctor's cottage the village
telegraph-boy handed Aggie a message which she at once carried to her
foster-father.

He tore it open, started, read it through several times, and then placed
it carefully in the flames.

Then he hurriedly put on his boots, overcoat and hat, and went forth,
explaining to his wife that he was suddenly called on urgent business to
London.

That evening, just before ten o'clock, a short dark figure could have
been seen slinking along by the railings of Berkeley Square, indistinct
in the night mist, which, with the dusk, had settled over London.

The man, though he moved constantly up and down to keep himself warm,
kept an alert and watchful eye upon the big sombre-looking mansion
opposite--the residence, as almost any passer-by would have told the
stranger, of Sir Felix Challas, the anti-Semitic philanthropist.

Over the semicircular fanlight a light burned brightly, but the inner
shutters of the ground floor rooms were closed, while the drawing-room
above was lighted.

Time after time the silent watcher passed and repassed the house, taking
in every detail with apparent curiosity, yet ever anxious and ever
expectant.

The constable standing at the corner of Hill Street eyed the dwarfed man
with some suspicion, but on winter nights the London streets, even in
the West End, abound with homeless loafers.

The Doctor, wearing a shabby overcoat several sizes too large for him
and a felt hat much battered and the worse for wear, watched vigilantly
and with much patience.

He saw a taxi-cab drive up before Sir Felix's and a rather tall,
good-looking man in opera hat and fur-lined coat descend and enter the
house.  The cab waited and ten minutes later the visitor--Jim Jannaway
it was--was bowed out by the grave-faced old butler, and giving the man
directions, was whirled away into Mount Street, out of sight.

"I suppose that's the fellow!" murmured the ugly little man beneath his
breath, as he stood back in the darkness against the railings opposite.
Hardly had the words escaped his lips when a hansom came from the
direction of Berkeley Street, and pulling up, an old, rather feeble
white-bearded man got out, paid the driver, and ascending the steps rang
the bell.

He was admitted without question, and the door was closed behind him.

"Erich Haupt, without a doubt," remarked the Doctor aloud.  "Why has he
returned to London?  Has he made a further discovery, I wonder.  The
description of him is exact."

For half an hour he waited, wondering what was happening within that
great mansion.

Then Jim Jannaway suddenly returned, dismissed his "taxi," and was
admitted.  All that coming and going showed that something was in the
wind.

"Red Mullet" had given him due warning from his hiding-place.  His
telegram had been despatched from Meopham, which he had discovered was a
pleasant Kentish village, not far from Gravesend.  He was evidently in
concealment there.

Just before eleven o'clock another hansom turning out of Hill Street in
the mist, pulled up before the house, and he watched a dark figure
alight from it.

Notwithstanding the dim light he recognised the visitor in an instant.
The figure was that of a tall, dark-eyed girl.

"Good Heavens!" he gasped, staring across the road, rigid.  "Mullet was
right!  He was not mistaken after all!  By Jove--then I know the truth!
We are betrayed into the hands of our enemy!"

And as the Doctor stood there he was entirely unaware that he, in turn,
was being watched from the opposite pavement--and by a woman!

CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

WHICH SOLVES A PROBLEM.

That day had been an eventful one at Pembridge Gardens.  Indeed, the
event of the great scholar, Arminger Griffin's life had occurred.

It happened in this way.  The January morning had been so dark that he
had been compelled to use the electric light upon his study table, and
during the whole morning he had been engaged upon that same futile
task--the problem of the cipher.

With the Hebrew text of Ezekiel open before him, and sheets of
manuscript paper upon the blotting-pad, he had been absorbed for hours
in his cabalistic calculations which, to the uninitiated, would convey
nothing.  They appeared to be elementary sums of addition and
subtraction--sums consisting of ordinary numericals combined with
letters of the Hebrew alphabet.

And curiously enough, in a back bedroom in the Waldorf Hotel, in
Aldwych, the white-bearded old German, Erich Haupt, who only the
previous night had returned from the Continent, sat making almost
similar calculations.  Before him also he had a copy of the Hebrew
Bible, and was taking sentences haphazard from Ezekiel xix, the
lamentation for the Princes of Israel under the parable of the lion's
whelps taken in a pit.

Early in the morning he had rung up Sir Felix on the telephone beside
the bed, announcing his arrival, and obtaining an appointment for later
in the day.

Both scholars, unknown to each other, were busy upon the same problem,
each hoping for success and triumph over the other.

Through weeks and weeks Griffin, seated in his big, silent, rather
gloomy study, had tried and tried again, yet always in vain.  He was a
calm, patient man, knowing well that in cryptography the first element
towards success is utmost patience.

It was noon.  The fog had not lifted, and Bayswater was plunged in the
semi-darkness of the London "pea-souper."

Gwen was out.  She was trying on a new evening frock at Whitley's--a
dainty creation in pale blue chiffon ordered specially for a dance which
Lady Duddington was giving in Grosvenor Street in a few days' time.

Alone, his grey head bent on the zone of shaded light upon the big
writing-table, the Professor had ever since breakfast time been putting
a new cipher theory to the test.

All the thirty odd numerical ciphers known to the ancients he had
applied to certain chapters of the Book of Ezekiel, but each one in
vain.  The result was mere chaos.  The ancients employed numerous
methods of cryptography besides the numerical cipher, among them being
the use of superfluous words where the correspondents agreed that only
some of the words, at equal distances apart, was necessary to form the
message; by misplaced words; by vertical and diagonal reading; by
artificial word grouping; by transposing the letters; by substitution of
letters; or by counterpart tabulations with changes at every letter in
the message, according to a pre-arranged plan.

All these, however, he had, in face of the reading of the scrap of the
manuscript of the dead discover of the secret, long ago dismissed.

He held the firm opinion--perhaps formed on account of that crumpled
paper found at the Bodleian--that the cipher was a numerical one, and
based upon some variation of the numerical value of the "waw" sign, or
the number six.

He now fully recognised how very cleverly old Erich Haupt had
endeavoured to put him off the scent.  The German was a very crafty old
fellow, whose several discoveries, though not altogether new, had evoked
considerable interest in academic circles in Europe.  He was author of
several learned studies in the Hebrew text, as well as the renowned work
upon the Messianic Prophecies, and without a doubt now that he had
possessed himself of the dead professor's discovery he intended to take
all the credit to himself.  Indeed it was his intention to pose as the
actual discoverer.

Continuing his work in silence and without interruption Griffin had been
making a long and elaborate calculation when, very soon after the little
Sheraton clock upon the mantelshelf had chimed noon, he started up with
a cry of surprise and stared across at the long old-fashioned bookcase
opposite.

Next moment his head was bent to the paper before him, as he rapidly
traced numerals and Hebrew characters, for he wrote the ancient language
as swiftly as he wrote English.

"Yes!" he whispered, as though in fear of his own voice.  "It actually
bears the test--the only one that has borne it through a whole sentence!
Can it be possible that I have here the actual key?"  For another
half-hour he remained busy with his calculations, gradually evolving a
Hebrew character after each calculation until he had written a line.
Then aloud he read the Hebrew to himself, afterwards translating it into
English thus:

"...the house of Togarmah, of the north quarters..."

The old man rose from his chair, pale and rigid, staring straight
through the window at the yellow sky.

"At last!" he gasped to himself.  "Success at last!  Holmboe's secret is
mine--_mine_!"

He was naturally a quiet man whom nothing could disturb, but now so
excited had he become that his hand shook and trembled and he was unable
to trace the Hebrew characters with any degree of accuracy.

He walked to the window, and looked out into the foggy road below.

He, Arminger Griffin, though Regius Professor, had, in the course of
that brief hour, become the greatest Hebrew scholar in Europe, the man
who would announce to the world the most interesting discovery of the
age!

He gazed around that silent restful room, like a man in a dream.  His
success hardly seemed true.  Where was Haupt, he wondered?  Would his
ingenuity and patience lead him to that same goal whereby he could read
the hidden record?

Pausing at his table he recalculated the sum upon the sheet of paper.
No.  He had made no mistake.  There was the decipher in black and white,
quite clear and quite intelligible!

He stretched his arms above his head, and standing upon the hearthrug
before the blaring fire, reflected deeply.

The declaration of the dead professor was true, after all.  The cipher
did exist in Ezekiel, therefore there was little doubt that the treasure
of Israel would be discovered through his instrumentality.

Haupt fortunately did not possess any of that manuscript which was
evidently a written explanation of the mode of deciphering the message.
Hence he would not be aware that the "waw" sign formed the basis of
calculation necessary.  But he, Arminger Griffin, had elucidated a
problem of which bygone generations of scholars had never dreamed, and
Israel would, if the secret were duly kept, recover the sacred relics of
her wonderful temple.

His face was blanched with suppressed excitement.  How should he act?

After some pondering he resolved to make no announcement to Diamond or
to Farquhar, both of whom he knew were away in the country, until he had
made a complete decipher of the whole of the secret record.

He intended to launch the good news upon them as a thunderclap.

"They both regard me as a `dry-as-dust' old fossil," he laughed to
himself.  "But they will soon realise that Arminger Griffin has patience
and ability to solve one of the most intricate problems ever presented
to any scholar.  We can now openly defy our enemies--whoever they are.
Before midnight I shall be in possession of the whole of the secret
record contained in the book of the Prophet, and if I do not turn it to
advantage it will not be my fault.  That man Mullet evidently fears to
call upon me.  Ah! his friends little dream that I have solved the
problem--that success now lies in my hands alone."

Crossing again to the table he slowly turned over the folios of the text
of Ezekiel which he had been using, glancing at it here and there.

Then he touched the electric bell, and Laura, the tall, dark-haired
parlour-maid, answered.

"Is Miss Gwen in?" he inquired.

"No, sir.  She's not yet returned."

"When she comes, please say I wish to see her at once."

"Very well, sir," was the quiet response of the well-trained maid who,
by the expression upon her master's face, instantly recognised that
something unusual had occurred.

She glanced at him with a quick interest, and then retired, closing the
door softly after her.

The Professor, reseating himself at his table, pushed his scanty grey
hair off his brow, and again readjusting his big round spectacles
settled down to continue his intensely interesting work of discovery.

"Holmboe says that the cipher exists in nine chapters," he remarked
aloud to himself.  "I wonder which of the forty-eight chapters he
alludes to!  Now let's see," he went on, slowly turning over the leaves
of the Hebrew text, "the book of Ezekiel's prophecy is divided into
several parts.  The first contains chapters i-xxiv, which are prophecies
relating to Israel and Judah, in which he foretells and justifies the
fall of Jerusalem.  The second is chapters xxv-xxxii, containing
denunciations of the neighbouring nations; the third is chapters
xxxiii-xxxix, which gives predictions of the restitution and union of
Judah and Israel, and the last, chapter xl-xlviii, visions of the ideal
theocracy and its institutions.  Now the question is in which of those
parts is hidden the record?"

The few words of the cipher which he had been able to read were
continued in chapter xxiv, beginning at verse 6; "Wherefore thus saith
the Lord God; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein,
and whose scum not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no
lot fall upon it.  For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon
the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with
dust," etc, down to the end of verse 27.  If those twenty-two verses
only contained eight words of the hidden record, then it was apparent
that the Professor had a greater task before him than he imagined.

Gwen, in emerging from Whiteley's into Westbourne Grove, had met a young
naval officer she knew.  He was home on leave, therefore she had
strolled leisurely with him down Queen's Road and along Bayswater Road,
in preference to taking a cab.  A couple of years before, when she was
still a mere girl and he only an acting sub-lieutenant, they had been
rather attached to each other.  He was, of course, unaware of her
engagement to Frank Farquhar, and she did not enlighten him, but allowed
him to chatter to her as they walked westward.  His people lived in
Porchester Terrace, and he had lately been at sea for a year with the
Mediterranean Fleet, he told her.

The yellow obscurity was now rapidly clearing as, at the corner of
Pembridge Gardens, he raised his hat and with some reluctance left her.

Then she hurried in, just as the luncheon gong was sounding, and had
only time to take off her hat and coat to be in her place at table.  Her
father was most punctual at his meals.  He believed in method at all
times, and carried method and the utmost punctuality into all his daily
habits.

When he entered the dining-room the girl saw, from his preoccupied
expression, that something had occurred.

She, however, made no inquiry before the servant, while he on his part,
though bursting with the good news, resolved to keep his information
until they had had their meal and retired into the study together.

Then he would explain to her, and show her the amazing result.

Therefore she chatted merrily, telling him how sweet her new gown
looked, and gossiping in her own sweet engaging way--with that girlish
laughter and merriment which was the sunshine of the old scholar's
otherwise dull and colourless existence.

Little did she dream, he thought, as he sat at table, of the staggering
announcement which he was about to make to her.

He had solved the problem!

CHAPTER THIRTY.

CLOSED DOORS.

"Will you come up with me into the study, dear?" asked the Professor, in
as quiet a voice as he could, when they had finished luncheon.

"I have a letter to write, dad," replied the girl in excuse.  "I'll come
in and sit with you before tea."

"But I want to speak to you, dear," he said.  "I want to tell you
something.  Come with me now."  Rather surprised at her father's
somewhat strained and unusual demeanour, the girl ascended the stairs to
the book-lined room, and when the door was closed the old man crossed to
where she stood, and said:

"Gwen, congratulate me, child."

"Upon what, dad?" she said, looking into his face, surprised.

"I have discovered the key to the cipher!"

The girl started.  Then with a wild cry she threw her arms about her
father's neck, kissed him passionately, and with tears of joy welling in
her eyes, congratulated him.

"What will Frank say!" she exclaimed breathlessly.  "How delighted he'll
be!  Why, dad, we shall discover the position of the hiding-place of the
sacred relics, after all!"

Her enthusiasm was unbounded.  Her father who had worked so hard by
night and by day upon those puzzling cryptic numericals, was at last
successful.

"Can you really read the cipher?" she asked quickly.

"Yes, dear," was her father's response.  "I have already deciphered part
of the extraordinary statement."

"Then we must telegraph to Frank," she said.  "He is down at Horsford,
visiting his sister and seeing Doctor Diamond at the same time."

"No, not yet, my child," he replied quietly.  "Let me complete the work
before we announce the good news to our friends.  I have told you,
because I knew you would be gratified."

"Why, of course I am, dad," replied the girl eagerly.  "It will greatly
enhance your reputation, besides preserving the sacred relics to the
Jews.  Our opponents had other intentions.  Their efforts are directed
towards causing annoyance and bringing ridicule upon the Hebrew race.
But," she added, her arm still affectionately around his neck, "how did
you accomplish it, dad?"

"Sit down, dear, and I'll explain to you," he said, pointing to the
armchair near his writing-table, while he took his writing-chair, and
drew towards him the open Hebrew text of Ezekiel.

"You see," he commenced, "for some weeks I have been applying all the
known numerical ciphers to this text, but without result.  More than
once I was able to read a couple or three words, and believed that I had
discovered the key.  But, alas!  I found it to fail inevitably before I
could establish a complete sentence.  I was about to relinquish the
problem as either impossible of solution, or as a theory without basis,
when this morning, almost as a last resource and certainly without
expecting any definite result, I applied a variation of the Apocalyptic
Number, which though appearing in the Book of Revelation, [Revelations,
xiii, 13] was no doubt known at a much earlier period.  In the text of
Ezekiel xvii, the first and second verses: `And the word of the Lord
came unto me, saying, Son of man, put forth a riddle and speak a parable
unto the house of Israel;' I had long recognised certain signs by which
I had suspicion that there was a hidden meaning, and again in verses 14,
16 and 16, ending with the words `even with him in the midst of Babylon
he shall die.'

"To my utter amazement I found, by applying the numbers 666--the Hebrew
`waw' sign three times repeated, that I could read an intelligible
sentence which was nothing less than a portion of the cipher exactly as
quoted by Holmboe!  Since my discovery I have been hard at work, and
have deciphered many ominous sentences."

"Then there is no doubt whatever now that the cipher record exists in
the writings of the prophet?"

"Not the slightest."

"But I don't quite understand how you arrived at the key, dad?" she
said.  "Explain to me, for, as you know, I'm all curiosity."

"Well, as you don't know Hebrew, dear, I'll try and explain it as
clearly as I can," he said.  "Each Hebrew letter has its own numerical
value, as you know, _A-leph_ representing 1, _Beth_ 2, _Gi-mel_ 3, and
so on to _Yodh_ 10, and the nine tens to 100, or _Qoph_, to 400,
represented by the last of the twenty-two consonants, _Taw_.  The fact
that Holmboe mentioned `_waw_,' or the number 6, in his manuscript,
first caused me to believe that he did so as a blind, because this also
signified `hook' and was the sign of evil.  I applied it diligently in
nearly two hundred places in the Book of Ezekiel, but without a single
success.  I used other numbers, indeed most of the combinations of the
twenty-two consonants, especially the one of three and thirty-three
which was one of the earliest numerical ciphers.  You know well how
diligently I worked, and how unsuccessful I have been until to-day."

"I know, dad," exclaimed the pretty girl, "but I confess I can hardly
follow you, even now."

"Well, listen," he said.  "The Apocalyptic Number is 666, and its
interpretation rests upon the fact that in Hebrew, as well as in Greek,
the letters of the alphabet did service for numbers.  Hence, a writer,
while avoiding a direct mention of some person or thing, could yet
indicate the same by a number which was the sum of the various values
comprising the name.  First establishing the point where the actual
message commences, which I may as well explain is at Ezekiel, x, 8; `And
there appeared in the cherubim the form of a man's hand under their
wings,' I took the first `waw' or 6 sign, then the eleventh letter,
being the sixth of sixty-six, then the sixty-sixth letter, and
afterwards the six hundred and sixty-sixth letter.  Following this, I
made the additions which are known to the Greeks and also to the
Hebrews, working it out thus: The fiftieth letter, the two-hundredth
letter, the sixth letter, the fiftieth letter, the hundredth letter, the
sixtieth letter and the two-hundredth letter--making in all six hundred
and sixty-six.  The Hebrew signs of each I wrote down in a line, and
having divided them into words, I found to my amazement, that I was
reading the secret record alleged by the dead professor!"

"But, surely, dad, that is a most ingenious cipher!" remarked his
daughter.

"Most intricate, I assure you.  By sheer good fortune I discovered the
starting-point."

"What led you to it?"

"A slight, almost unnoticeable deviation of the present Hebrew text from
the St Petersburg codex.  I had never before noticed it, and it only
arrested my attention because I was studying the subject so very
closely."

"And after making the additions of 666, how did you proceed?" urged the
girl.

He paused for a few seconds as though in hesitation.

"By starting at the first `waw' sign and repeating my key.  Sometimes,
in a whole chapter, there is not a word of cipher, but following the
numbers with regularity it reappears in the next.  It is a most
marvellous and most cunningly concealed record accounting, of course,
for the number of superfluous and rather incongruous words in the
writings of the prophet."

"Was it written in the text--or placed there afterwards?" she asked.

"Placed there afterwards, without a doubt," was the Professor's quick
reply.  "Holy writ was inspired, of course, but some temple priest, an
exile in Babylon probably, worked out the cipher and placed the record
in the text in order that it might be there preserved and the existence
of the treasure be known to coming generations of Jews who would be then
aware of the existence of their war-chest."

"It really is a most amazing discovery, dad dear," declared the girl
much excited.  "When you publish it the whole world will be startled!"

"Yes, my dear," was the old fellow's response, as he ran his fingers
through his scanty grey hair.  "We have here before us," and he placed
his hand upon the open Hebrew text, "a secret explained which is surely
the greatest and most remarkable of any discovered in any age."

The girl, rising from her chair, saw upon the manuscript paper on her
father's blotting-pad, a number of lines of hastily-written Hebrew
words.

"Is that part of the deciphered record?" she inquired, greatly
interested.

"Yes, dear."

"Oh, do read them to me, dad," she cried, "I'm dying to learn exactly
the purport of this message hidden through so many generations!"

"No, Gwen," was the old man's calm response, "not until I have worked
out the whole.  Then you shall, my child, be the first to have knowledge
of the secret of Israel.  And remember it is my wish that you write
nothing to Farquhar regarding it.  We must keep our knowledge to
ourselves--very closely to ourselves, remember.  Erich Haupt must have
no suspicion of my success.  Otherwise we may even yet be forestalled."

"I quite see the danger, dad," remarked his daughter, "but I'm so
interested, do go on with your task and show me how it is accomplished."

"Very well," he said, smiling and humouring her.  "You see here, at this
mark," and he showed her a pencilled line upon the Hebrew text, "that is
where I halted for luncheon.  Now we go on to the next sign of six.
See, here it is--in the next line.  Now we count the eleventh letter,"
and he wrote it down in Hebrew.  Then he counted the sixty-sixth, the
six hundredth and sixty-sixth, the fiftieth, the two-hundredth, and so
on until he had a number of Hebrew signs ranged side by side.  Presently
he said, pointing to them:

"Here you are!  The English translation to this is `...yourselves, and
wonder, for unto thee, O children of Israel...'"

"Really, dad!" exclaimed the girl, highly excited.  "It's most
remarkable!"

"Yes," he admitted.  "I confess that until now I held the same idea that
every Jewish Rabbi holds--namely that no secret cipher can exist in our
inspired writings."

"But you have now proved it beyond question!" she declared.

"Yes.  But startling as it may be, we must preserve our secret, dear.
There are others endeavouring to learn the trend of my investigations,
recollect.  We may have spies upon us, for aught we know," he added in a
low tone, glancing at her with a significant look.

"How long do you expect it will take before you are in full possession
of the whole of the secret statement?" she asked.

"Many hours, my dear.  Perhaps many days--how can I tell.  Holmboe says
it runs through only nine chapters.  Therefore it should end with
chapter xxvi.  But as far as I can gather I believe I shall find further
cryptic statements in the later chapters.  There are certain evidences
of these in chapter xxxvii, 16, in chapter xxxix, 18, 19 and 20, and
again in chapter xliv, 5.  Therefore, I anticipate that my task may be a
rather long one.  The counting and recounting to ensure accuracy
occupies so much time.  The miscounting of a single letter would throw
everything out and prevent the record being recovered, as you will
readily foresee.  Hence, it must be done with the greatest precision and
patience."

"But, dad--this is most joyful news!" declared the girl excitedly, "I'm
most anxious to telegraph to Frank."

"Not until the secret is wholly ours, my dear.  Remember we must keep
the key a most profound secret to ourselves."

"Of course, dad," the girl answered, "I quite see that this information
must not be allowed to pass to our enemies."

Little did father or daughter imagine that, within their own quiet
household, was a spy--the maid Laura, suborned by Jim Jannaway.

When the pair had entered the study she had crept silently up to the
door, and listened intently for the one fact which Jannaway had
instructed her to listen--the means by which the cipher could be
unravelled.

She was a shrewd, intelligent girl, and the inducement which the
good-looking adventurer had held out to her was such that the
Professor's explanation to his daughter impressed itself upon her
memory.

She recollected every word, and still stood listening, able to hear
quite distinctly, until there seemed no further information to be
gathered.  Then she descended the stairs, and made certain memoranda of
the text at which to commence, and the mode by which the decipher could
be made.

Half an hour later she made an excuse to the cook that she wished to go
out to buy some hairpins, and then despatched a telegram to the name and
address which her generous and good-looking "gentleman" had given her.

Meanwhile Gwen still sat with her father at his writing-table watching
him slowly taking from the text of the Book of Ezekiel the full and
complete record that had been hidden from scholars through all the
ages--the record which was to deliver back to the house of Israel her
most sacred possessions.

The light of the short afternoon faded, the electric light was switched
on, tea was served by the faithless maid-servant, and dinner had been
announced.

But the Professor worked on, regardless and oblivious of everything.  He
was far too occupied, and Gwen was also too excited to dress and descend
to dinner.  Therefore, Laura served the meal upon a tray.

All was silence save the Professor's dry monotonous voice as he counted
aloud the letters of the Hebrew text, recounted them to reassure
himself, and then set down a Hebrew character as result.

Thus from after luncheon until midnight--through the time indeed that
Diamond was so patiently watching the big house in Berkeley Square--the
work of solving the problem went slowly on.

Gwen sat and watched her father's Hebrew manuscript grow apace, until it
covered many quarto pages.  Now and then she assisted in counting the
letters, verifying her father's addition.

Then at last, just after the old-fashioned clock upon the mantelshelf
had chimed twelve, the old scholar raised his grey head with a sigh, and
wiping his glasses, as was his habit, said:

"Sit down, dear, and write the English translation at my dictation.  I
think we now have it quite complete."

CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

EXPOSES THE CONSPIRACY.

While Professor Griffin had been so busily engaged deciphering the
concluding portion of the secret record, a strange scene was in progress
at Sir Felix Challas's, in Berkeley Square.

First, Jim Jannaway had arrived and had held a short consultation in the
library with the red-faced Baronet, afterwards quickly leaving.  Then,
from the Waldorf Hotel, summoned by telephone, came old Erich Haupt,
bustling and full of suppressed excitement.

Soon afterwards, the well-dressed Jim had returned, and had waited in
momentary expectancy, ready to dart out into the hall on hearing the
sound of cab wheels.

At last they were heard and the man-servant opened the door to Laura,
tall, dark-haired and rather good-looking parlour-maid at Pembridge
Gardens.

In the well-carpeted hall she recognised the man who had taken her out
to dinner and the theatre on several occasions, and advanced excitedly
to meet him.

"Oh!  Laura!" he cried.  "I'm so glad you've come.  I had your `wire,'
and you got my message in reply, of course?  You must see the gov'nor.
This is his house, and I want you to tell him how the Professor is
solving that puzzle."  Then, lowering his voice, he added.  "There's a
pot of money in it for both of us, dear, if you keep your wits about
you.  You recollect what I promised you last Tuesday, don't you?"

The girl sniggered and nodded.  She was a giddy young person, whose head
had been turned by the admiration of that good-looking man who called
himself "Miller," and who said he was a lawyer's clerk.  He had promised
to become engaged to her and to marry her, provided they could get only
a good round sum from "the gov'nor" for the information she could, with
such ease, supply.

This had placed the girl upon the constant alert, with the present
result.

Her nonchalant admirer led the way across the hall to the library,
pushed upon the door, and introduced her to the two men therein--
Challas, fat and prosperous, and Haupt, white-bearded and bespectacled.

Then, when the door was closed and she had seated herself, Challas--or
"Mr Murray," as he had been introduced--asked:

"I believe you're Laura, and you are parlour-maid at Professor
Griffin's, aren't you?"

"Yes, sir," replied the girl, timidly, picking at her neat black skirt.

"Well, sir," explained Jim, bearing out his part of lawyer's clerk,
"some time ago I explained to my young lady here, what we particularly
wanted to know, and she's kept both eyes and ears open.  To-day she's
learned something, it seems."

"What is it?" inquired old Erich, in a deep tone, with his strong German
accent.

"Let the young lady explain herself," urged the man introduced as
"Murray," and they all sat silent.

"Well, sir," the girl faltered, a moment later.  "You see it was like
this.  After luncheon to-day the Professor, who'd been very hard at work
as usual all the morning, took Miss Gwen up to the study to speak to her
privately; I listened, and I heard all their conversation.  He told her
how he'd solved the problem of the cipher."

"Solved it!" ejaculated the old German, staring at her through his
spectacles.

"Yes, sir," the girl went on.  "He told Miss Gwen that he'd tried and
tried, but always failed.  But he had taken the--well, sir, I think he
called it the apoplectic number."

The German laughed heartily.

"I know," he said.  "You mean the Apocalyptic Number, _fraulein_--the
number 666."

"That's it, sir," she said, a little flurried, while Jim exchanged
significant glances with Challas.  "He commences at the tenth chapter of
Ezekiel, eighth verse, and--and--" Then she fumbled in her pocket,
producing a piece of crumpled paper to which she referred.  "He takes
the first sign of 6," she went on, "then the eleventh letter, the
sixty-sixth letter, and the six hundred and sixty-sixth letter.  After
this, the fiftieth letter, the two-hundredth letter, the sixth letter,
the fiftieth letter, the hundredth letter, the sixtieth letter, and the
two-hundredth letter--making six hundred and sixty-six in all.  He
writes down each of the Hebrew letters, and then reads them off like a
book."

"Wait--ah! wait!" urged the old German.  "Let us have that again,
_fraulein_," and crossing to Sir Felix's big mahogany writing-table, he
opened the Hebrew text of Ezekiel upon it.  "Where do you say the
Professor commences--at the tenth chapter, eighth verse--eh?  Good!" and
he hastily found the reference.  "Now?"

"Just tell this gentleman," urged Jim, "tell him exactly what you
heard."

"Well, starting with the eighth verse, he commences with what he termed
the first `waw' sign."

"Zo! that's the equivalent of the number 6," Haupt remarked.

"Then the eleventh letter."

The old professor counted and wrote down the letter in question in
Hebrew characters.

"The sixty-sixth," said the girl.

The old man counted sixty-six, while Sir Felix and Jannaway watched with
intense, almost breathless interest.  Here was the secret, snatched from
their dreaded opponent, Arminger Griffin!

"And now the six hundred and sixty-sixth," the girl went on, apparently
thoroughly at home with the strangely assorted trio.

This took some time to count, but presently it was accomplished, and the
girl time after time gave the old professor directions--the fiftieth
letter, the two-hundredth letter, and so on.

"Well?" asked Challas, a few moments later, unable to repress his
excitement any longer.  "Do you make anything out of it?"

The old man was silent.  He was carefully studying the Hebrew characters
he had written down.

"Yes!" he gasped.  "It is the secret--the great secret!"  And he started
up, exclaiming, "At last! at last--thanks to _fraulein_ here--we have
the key!"

"And we can actually read the cipher?" cried Challas.

"Most certainly," responded the old scholar.  "The secret is ours!
Marvellous, how Griffin discovered it."

"Confound Griffin!" exclaimed Jim Jannaway.  "We have to thank Laura,
here, for our success!  She ought to be well rewarded."

"And so she shall," declared the man, whom the girl knew as "Mr
Murray."

"It's late to-night, and we want Erich to get on at once with the
decipher.  Besides, the young lady, no doubt, wishes to get back home.
Bring her to me to-morrow, or next day--and she shall be well rewarded."

"Thank you very much, sir," was the silly girl's gratified reply, as she
looked triumphant into the face of the cunning man who had declared his
love for her.

The truth was that, having obtained that most valuable information, the
trio wanted to get rid of her as soon as possible.  Therefore, with
excuses that the household at Pembridge Gardens would be suspicious if
she returned too late, they bundled her almost unceremoniously outside,
Jim hailing a hansom for her, paying the man, and telling him to drive
to Notting Hill Gate Station.

Then, when he re-entered, he exclaimed with a laugh to the Baronet,
"That was a cheap `quid's' worth of information, wasn't it--eh?"

"Cheap, my dear boy?  Why, it's placed us absolutely on top.  The
treasure, if it still remains there, is ours!"

"Ah! not too hasty!  Not too hasty!" exclaimed the old German in his
deep guttural voice, and raising his head from the table.  "Up to a
certain point, it is all right, but--"

"But what?" the others gasped, in the same breath.

"Well, there's something wanting, alas!  Or else the girl has made a
great mistake.  After the addition of the numbers to 666, all goes
entirely wrong!"

"Goes wrong!" they echoed breathlessly, with one accord.

"Yes.  The further reading is quite unintelligible," he declared,
speaking with his strong Teutonic accent.

"The girl seemed quite certain about it!" exclaimed Jim, exchanging
glances with Challas.

"Quite," the other remarked, blandly.

"Well, my dear sirs!" exclaimed Haupt, pointing to his lines of
hastily-written Hebrew.  "The commencement of the record is here, plain
enough.  It commences, `Remember and forget not, O Israel.  Not for thy
righteousness---' But after taking the two-hundredth letter I can
discover nothing.  Commencing again at six only results in nothing,
while a repetition of the fiftieth and the consequent addition is
equally futile.  No!  The confounded girl has made some mistake--and we
are once more at a standstill.  You see that one false number throws out
the whole.  The cipher is one of the most ingenious ever conceived."

"But, my dear Haupt, you know the basis, and where it commences!  You
will surely succeed!"  Challas cried, frantically.

The old man shook his head very dubiously.

"As I have already told you," he responded in his deep voice, "a single
misplaced number throws it all out.  We are again at an absolute
deadlock--and must remain as ignorant as we were before."

"But have you made every possible effort?" asked Jim Jannaway, with
eager face, as he bent over the old man's shoulders.

"I have tried all the combinations of the Apocalyptic Number, but they
are futile!" replied the old German, laying down his pen, and blinking
through his glasses.

"Then the girl has failed us after all," remarked Challas in a low, hard
voice.  "Griffin has deciphered the record and we're absolutely `in the
cart.'"

"I won't give up!" declared Jannaway.  "I'm hanged if I will!  This may
be one of Charlie's tricks, remember!  He may have learnt the truth and
got hold of Laura to put us on the wrong scent."

"He may--curse him!" muttered Sir Felix.  "Why didn't he take my warning
and get away abroad?"

"Because he's quite as cute as we are.  He knows full well that while he
remains in England circumstances will continue to be propitious.  So he
lives quietly down in Kent, with both eyes very much open."

Already Jim Jannaway's ingenious mind was active; already he was
devising a way out of the awkward _cul-de-sac_ in which they now found
themselves.

"What are we to do?" inquired Sir Felix, with his dark brows knitted at
this sudden failure of all his elaborate plans.

"Leave it to me," replied the good-looking scoundrel, with the utmost
confidence.  "Let Erich remain quietly within reach--not, however, at
the Waldorf--and allow me to carry out the scheme in my own way."

"I cannot think why the girl made such a mistake," Challas remarked very
disappointedly.  "I admit the solution was complicated, but you saw that
she was clever enough to write it down."

"She listened behind a closed door.  She may have misunderstood," Jim
remarked.

"Or, what is much more likely," remarked the German, "Griffin, who has
the reputation of being a very shrewd man, does not trust his daughter,
and purposely misled her in explaining his secret."

"No, I don't think that," said Jannaway.  "Griffin trusts the girl, even
though she's quite young, absolutely and implicitly."

And thus the three desperate schemers agreed to leave matters in the
hands of the most daring and unscrupulous of men, Jim Jannaway,
unconscious that the exterior of the mansion was being watched
independently by two persons, Doctor Diamond, and a thin-faced, ill-clad
woman, who, noticing the Doctor's keen interest in the place, glanced at
him full of surprise and wonder.

CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

REVEALS THE CIPHER RECORD.

In the study at Pembridge Gardens, the silence only broken by the solemn
ticking of the little Sheraton clock, Professor Griffin's calm, even
voice was slowly dictating to Gwen the translation from the Hebrew of
the cipher record into English.

The girl, as her father's amanuensis, had long ago become quite an
expert with the typewriter, and in order to make a clear copy she had
seated herself at the machine, her slim, white fingers deftly touching
the keys.

"If you are ready dear, we'll begin," said the old man, drawing his
folios of scribbled Hebrew towards him.

"I'm quite ready, dad," she assured him, pulling her skirt around her at
the little table by his side upon which the typewriter was fixed.

"Very well, then.  I'll translate slowly.  Forgive me if I hesitate,
child, for some of it may perhaps be difficult to put into intelligible
or Biblical English.  It is really a most astounding statement by a
scribe of the Temple."

Then, after a brief pause, he began to dictate to her the hidden record,
which was as follows:

"_Remember and forget not, O Israel.  Not_ for thy righteousness, or for
the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess thy land, but
for the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God shall drive them
out before thee.

"_Thou shalt love_ the Lord thy God and keep His charge, His statutes
and His commandments.

"_And_ know ye this day why this secret record is written, that it may
be preserved unto the just...  _The_ lapse of years are nearing its
filling.  _The_ relief of the Doom will come, in spite of all.  _The_
people's right is nearing.  _The_ period of the Blood-debts, and that of
the Suppression will lose its power, and Israel shall be restored (here
follow seven words undecipherable).

"..._As_ the Lord God was against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief
prince of Meshech and Tubal, Gomer and all his bands, the house of
Togarmah, of the north quarters, so shall He be against all the enemies
of Israel that spread over the land.  _For_ He will make His Holy name
known in the midst of His people Israel, and will not let them pollute
His Holy name any more; and the heathen shall know that He is the Lord,
the Holy One in Israel...

"_And the desolate_ places of the Land shall become populated, Jerusalem
the city shall be restored, the sanctuary shall be set up, and the
children of Israel shall be gathered there from the four corners of the
earth where they will be found scattered.

"_Be thou prepared_, and prepare thyself, for the Lord God will make a
covenant of peace with His chosen people; it shall be a peace
everlasting and His tabernacle shall be set in the midst of them for
evermore, even upon Mount Moriah.

"_Stay_ yourselves, and wonder, for unto thee, O children of Israel, are
the greater treasures of Solomon's Temple still preserved.  _And_ thus
it is therein written in a book that is sealed, so that the wicked of
Babylon and the enemies of Israel shall not know.  _Verily_ I say unto
you the Ark of the Covenant, and the tablets, and the rod of Aaron, and
the other sacred objects which Solomon placed in the house of the Lord
are still with thee, O Israel, until the wastes be builded, the cities
inhabited and the Lord God cometh again unto the mountains of
Jerusalem... for your own ways--and the Lord will build up the ruined
places--

"_Know ye the truth_ concerning the sacred treasures of Israel, the
vessels out of the house of the Lord.  _In_ the third year of Jehoiakim,
King of Judah, cameth one night into Jerusalem one Hashbbiah, a secret
messenger from Antioch, who seeking Zeruiah, the high priest, told him
in private that Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, had advanced upon the hosts
of Pharaoh-Necho at Carchemish and defeated him, and that the King of
Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all
that pertained unto the King of Egypt.

"_Now_ Zeruiah, a man full of learning, remembered the prayer of
Solomon, and saw that the prophecy of the fall of Jerusalem was to be
fulfilled, and that Judah was to be led into captivity by the
Babylonians...  _And_ he went out upon the mountain alone and prayed
unto the Lord.  _And_ the Lord directed him to take counsel of six
priests, of whom one was the prophet Ezekiel, to decide how the sacred
things of the house of the Lord should be held from the hands of the
despoiler.

"_And to one of the priests_, Uzziah, son of Haziah who came from Gaza,
was revealed a hiding-place outside the gates of Jerusalem, beyond the
valley of Jehoshaphat, where the treasures could be concealed beneath
the earth in a dry-room, in connection with a series of water-tunnels,
which could be emptied only by those who knew the secret gate of the
waters.

"_And the ears of Zeruiah_ the high priest, heard a voice behind him
saying: `This is the way, walk ye in it.  Place the treasures of the
house of Jehovah therein, and seal them with the waters, so that no man
shall know.'

"_So_ at night he went with Uzziah onto the place that was revealed,
which is on the side of the mount.

"_And_ he saw that it had been used by thieves in the days when Rehoboam
was king, and that its entrance had since been unknown to any man.

"_And returning to_ the inner court of the Temple in darkness of night
he went into the Holy Place and called unto him Baruch, the son of
Neriah, Sherebbiah, the scribe, Ezekiel the priest, and the five other
priests.  _And_ together both that night and the next and through many
nights did they carry forth the most treasured objects of the Temple
down into the valley, letting no man know that they were being taken
from the house of the Lord.

"_For since the beginning_ of the world men have not seen such great
treasure as was in the darkness removed from the house of Jehovah, from
the defenceless city upon which the judgment of God was set.  _Woe_ unto
Jerusalem for Nebuchadnezzar was hastening upon the City of Judah, and
the hour of her destruction was approaching.

"_And they took from_ the Holy of Holies the Ark of the Covenant,
together with the stone tablets which Moses put there at Horeb, the pot
of manna and the staff of Aaron and the two cherubims of fine gold, the
Urim and Thummim with two rubies of great size and a multitude of other
gems set around them...  And of the other treasures of the house of the
Lord did they bring forth; of basons of pure gold made by Solomon which
Shishak, Ging of Egypt had restored, three thousand and forty; of the
chargers of gold eight hundred and two; of the candlesticks of gold from
the oracle four; of the lamps of gold six hundred and ten, of the tongs
of gold six hundred, and of the smaller tablets of gold four score and
five; of spoons of gold two thousand; of censers of gold one thousand
and forty-six, and of the bowls which Solomon commanded to be made of
the gold of Ophir two thousand and seventy...  _Furthermore_ of the gems
and precious stones of Solomon they took seven ox-loads of fine gold,
three talents together with the archives of the Temple in secret; so
that of the vessels of gold there remained only about six thousand and
these Nebuchadnezzar afterwards carried off to Babylon, where they were
dedicated unto his god Belus--

"_It came even to pass_ that when the King of Babylon and his host
searched for the other holy vessels of the Temple they found them not,
for they knew not their hiding-place, and none knew save the priests and
the two scribes.  _Wherefore_ afterwards in my captivity in Babylon, I,
Michaiah the scribe, invented this secret writing by which the place of
concealment of the tablets of Moses should not be lost.  Secure shall
they remain, with the great treasure, the war-chest of the house of
Israel, until the coming of the Messiah, who alone may open their place
of concealment, in order that He may furnish proof of the faith.  _He_
hath chosen Jerusalem that His name may be there.

"_And be it now known_ unto you in what place to seek for the chamber of
the sacred Ark.  _At_ the lower platform of the brazen altar of the
Temple turn thy face to the southward, and measure four reeds and
thirty-three legal cubits, unto the north end of the Pool of Siloh.
_Thence_, to the sunrise, measure one thousand and fifty cubits unto the
highest point on the mount of Solomon's idolatry.  _Face_ unto the
south-west, and measure ten-score cubits and four, down to the hillside
to the face of stone.  _From_ the cleft fifteen cubits.

"_Moreover, at the gate_ of the Priests at the north-west corner of the
sanctuary, face the south-east, and pace four hundred and three cubits
unto the centre of the tomb in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and thence to
the south nine reeds and three-score cubits, which bringest thee unto
the same wall of rock, fifteen cubits from the cleft.

"_And the distance_ from En-rogel is, to the north-east, of cubits three
hundred and ninety-four, where the entrance faceth directly the bend of
the Valley of Hinnom.

"_Of the three entrances_, two are impassable.  Know ye therefore that
the third is in the face of the rock, concealed from the sight of all
men at the point where the valleys converge, at the base of the mount,
from the cleft fifteen legal cubits.

"_To learn_ the whereabouts of the secret chamber of the Ark, O ye
Israel, measure from the hidden entrance up the face of the rock and
over the mount with thine eyes set to the east two reeds and fourscore
cubits and three, till thou comest to the gate of stone set in the rock
which, when opened, will let forth the flood to admit thee from the
Valley of Jehoshaphat.

"_O hear me_, ye enemies of the Lord!  Curses, yea, sixty times six
curses shall be upon the head of any who dare to attempt to violate the
sacred treasure-house of Israel.

"_Moreover the Lord_ hath performed the word that He spake, and Judah
remaineth beneath the heel of the oppressor.

"_Now therefore these acts_ are not written in the book of the
chronicles of Israel lest thine enemies search to recover the holy
things.

"_Hearken O Lord_ God of Israel to the supplications of Thy servant.  If
Thy people be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have
sinned against Thee, and shall return and confess Thy name, then hear
Thou from the heavens and bring them again unto the land which Thou
gavest to them and to their fathers.

"_Wherefore I beseech Thee_ to stay Thine hand, and seek not to discover
what is hidden until the Lord have given rest unto your brethren, as
well as unto you, and until they also possess the Land, which the Lord
your God hath given them.

"_For he who entereth therein_ shall be accursed.  Cursed shalt thou be
in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.  Cursed shalt thou
be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out
_The_ Lord shall send thee cursing, vexation and rebuke, in all that
thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and
until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings.
_Fear_ the Lord thy God.

"_These words am I commanded_ by Zeruiah the high priest to write in our
captivity in secret script, that only those of the faith shall know and
shall understand."

And when the girl had finished typing, she raised her head, and stared
at her father in abject wonder.  Here was the complete solution of the
problem!  The truth was written there!

CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

IN THE NIGHT.

Laura, the parlour-maid, had been let in at the area-door by the cook,
to whom she had made her excuses for the lateness of the hour, and had
crept up to her room, fully satisfied at having assisted her
good-looking lover.  She was, of course, in utter ignorance that "Mr
Miller" was the person to whom Miss Gwen's mysterious absence from home
had been due.  Otherwise she certainly would not have fallen into the
trap.

Meanwhile, in the study, with the typed folios of the cipher before him,
the old Professor sat making certain explanations to his daughter and
answering her eager questions.

"We ought to telegraph to Frank the first thing in the morning, dad!"
she cried, when she had recovered from her excitement at learning the
secret.

"I have not yet decided upon my course of action, dear," was his slow,
deliberate answer.  "To-night we are dealing with this astounding record
of the authenticity of which there seems not the slightest doubt.  I
have been using the exact copy of the St Petersburg text of Ezekiel--
the oldest known manuscript.  It is evident from the word of Michaiah
the scribe, that, having invented the cipher, he altered certain words
of the original text of Ezekiel with Ezekiel's knowledge and consent, in
order to include in the book this secret record."

"It agrees entirely with Biblical history, does it not?" asked the girl.

"Yes.  Several hitherto uncertain facts are here explained.  For
instance, it is now made quite clear that Shishak, King of Egypt,
restored to the Temple certain of the basins of gold made by Solomon.
Again, Michaiah shows that none of the sacred vessels secreted were
afterwards used in the Temple.  Those used in the second temple were
certainly those carried away by Nebuchadnezzar and restored by Cyrus."

Then rising he took from a cupboard a large roll-map of the environs of
Jerusalem issued by the Palestine Exploration Fund, and both studied it
very closely.

"What is meant by the mount of Solomon's idolatry?" asked Gwen.

"It is now known as the Mount of the Offence," he answered.  "Here it
is--about half a mile almost due south of the temple mount.  Sometimes
it is called the Mount of Scandal, for upon it Solomon and some of his
successors built high places, altars to Moloch, to Ashtoreth, and to
other strange gods.  [1 Kings xi, 5-7.]  I recollect the hill quite
well.  On the summit is now a Benedictine Monastery, while the slopes
are occupied by a Jewish cemetery.  The Turks call it Baten el Hawa
(Bottle of the Winds).  The measurements given seem to be most explicit,
the entrance to the chamber being on the west side of the extreme south
of the mount, facing the sudden bend in the Valley of Hinnom.  See,
here," and he pointed to the spot upon the map.  "And at the east side,
at some spot to be determined by measurements, are the secret
flood-gates by which the waters can be released.  The `dry-room' is
evidently situated above the water-tunnels, at such a height that the
waters never rise there."

"And can those ancient measures be worked out to modern measures?"

"Yes.  We practically know almost exactly what was the reed, and what
was the legal cubit of the days of Jehoiakim as compared with the
ordinary cubit.  Surveyors will have no difficulty in finding the exact
spot indicated."

"You do not think, dad, that after the restoration and rebuilding of the
Temple that the treasures were recovered?"

"Certainly not.  If so, we should certainly have had some record in Holy
Writ of the Ark of the Covenant and the tablets.  But there is none.
Since a few days before Nebuchadnezzar's hosts entered Jerusalem, the
Ark has never been seen.  My firm belief is that it is still in its
place of concealment as stated by Michaiah the scribe."

"And what shall you do now, dad?" inquired the girl, her elbows upon the
table, as she looked up into his face.  "You have solved a problem that
will startle the whole world!"

"Yes, dear," he sighed, passing his hand across his brow.  "It is so
remarkable that I hardly know how to act.  I must, of course, see
Diamond and Farquhar, and consult with them.  One thing is quite
certain; for the present we must keep this matter a most profound
secret.  If our enemies were to gain wind of it, they would send out at
once and purchase the land for themselves."

"But they can't know, dad."

"Ah, dear!  I'm--I'm suspicious.  With such enormous possibilities
before us, who knows that our secret enemies may not have bribed our
servants," he said.  "For that reason, Gwen dear--and please forgive
me--fearing that there might be eaves-droppers, I purposely, when
explaining to you the cipher this afternoon, rearranged and omitted some
of the second portion of it, so that our secret could not possibly leak
out."

"But surely, dad!" cried the girl.  "You don't suspect Laura or
Mullingar, or Kate, being in the employ of our enemies, do you?"

"My child, it is best to be always wary in a matter such as this.  As
your friend Mr Mullet has already told you, they appear to be most
unscrupulous."

"I wonder where Mr Mullet is--why he doesn't write or telephone to me,
as he promised."

"Don't distress yourself about him," urged the old Professor.  "We hold
the secret, and for to-night at least that is sufficient."

And then, after gathering the typed sheets together he put a fastener
through them and locked the precious decipher carefully in one of the
drawers of his writing-table.  Then a few moments later, it already
being two o'clock in the morning, they both ascended to their rooms.

When upon the landing, the old man kissed his daughter tenderly on the
brow as was his habit, saying:

"Good-night, my child.  I fear you must be very tired.  But think!--we
have completed our task.  We alone know the great secret which will
convulse the whole civilised world!"

In her own pretty room Gwen threw herself into the cosy chintz-covered
armchair before the fire, and pondered deeply.

She was thinking of Frank--ever of him.  Though she had been fond of
flirtation, and though perhaps she had committed grave breaches of the
_convenances_ before she had known young Farquhar, yet all had now
changed.  She would give her very life for him--for was she not his, and
his alone?

Over her spread the thought of the man who had posed as Frank's friend--
that man who had laughed defiance in her face, the man who was in league
with her father's enemies.  Who was he?  What was he? she wondered.
Then there rose before her the recollection of the man Mullet, the man
with the ugly past, as he himself had admitted, yet nevertheless devoted
to his little daughter, and a gentleman.  She longed to see him again--
to introduce him to her lover, and to tell the latter the whole strange
truth.

To her, it seemed as though Mullet feared the man who had so cleverly
entrapped her, just as he was the "cat's-paw" of the bloated red-faced
man who had raised his hand to strike her.

Who were these people? she wondered.  Why did Mullet fear them?

Having exchanged her dress for an easy _robe-de-chambre_, she sat before
the fire plaiting her long dark tresses, her eyes fixed upon the fire,
now fast dying away.

She had knowledge of that marvellous secret--the whereabouts of the
bewildering treasure of Israel.  Yet how would it all end?  Why had her
father suspicion of spies in their own home?  What could he suspect?

She wondered, as she had often wondered, what conclusion her father had
formed regarding her mysterious absence from home, and often, in her
moments of reflection, she found herself puzzled and pondering regarding
her unconsciousness on that never-to-be-forgotten night when she had
found herself alone and helpless in the hands of the man who had laughed
at her innocence and dismay.

She dare not tell Frank.  It was her secret--a dark secret which she had
resolved to keep at all hazards--one that he should never know.

"But he is mine again!" she murmured to herself, a sweet smile of
contentment playing about her lips.  "I have been a fickle girl, I know,
but, after all, every girl is entitled to have one good time in her
life.  I've had mine, and I have found Frank.  I love him, and he loves
me.  I know he does.  And to-morrow dad will `wire' him, and I shall see
him again.  Ah! what will he say, I wonder--now that dad has discovered
the secret.  Dear old dad!  He deserves all the _kudos_ he'll get from
the great discovery, for he's worked hard--worked night and day almost.
And the ugly little Doctor?  I wonder how he'll take it?  One thing is
plain, that we have outwitted that red-faced scoundrel and his friends.
We know the truth, while they are still in ignorance."

For a long time she sat, her pretty head, with its two long plaits
secured by blue ribbons, pillowed upon the muslin-covered cushion in the
low comfortable armchair, her bare feet thrust into slippers, and upon
her sweet countenance an expression of calm content.

The little clock upon her mantelshelf, chiming the half-hour--half-past
three--aroused her from her reverie, and she shivered, for the fire had
died away and the room had now become chilly.  So preoccupied had she
been that she had not noticed that the fire was already out.

As she stirred herself, she suddenly recollected that, downstairs in the
study, she had left her book in which she was greatly interested, and
which she wanted to continue when she awoke in the morning.  It was a
heavy work of one of the German philosophers which she was studying, for
since leaving school she had done a vast amount of reading, especially
French and German literature.  She was highly educated and cultured,
and, unlike the average young girl of our twentieth century, she had not
put aside her books with her ankle-skirts.

In her long trailing robe of pale _eau-de-nil_ she crossed the room, and
seating herself at her writing-table scribbled a note to her dressmaker,
which she had forgotten.  Then having put a stamp upon it, she quickly
opened her door, crept softly past her father's room, fearing to wake
him, and down the thickly carpeted stairs where her slippered feet fell
noiselessly.

She had no candle, but she knew her way about the house quite well in
the dark, and also knew where to put her hand upon most of the electric
switches.

Creeping softly down, afraid every moment that the stairs would creak--
for stairs always have a horrid habit of creaking in the silence of the
night--she carried the letter in her hand for the purpose of placing it
in the rack in the study which Laura always cleared when she went to the
room in the morning, and Kate took the letters to the post-office down
at the corner.

Reaching the landing she crossed it to the study-door, but as she did so
she saw, to her surprise, a light issuing from the crack beneath.

Her father had evidently returned there to continue his work, as he
sometimes did when unable to sleep.

For a second she hesitated whether she should enter, but making up her
mind suddenly, she placed her fingers upon the handle and opened the
door.

Next instant, however, uttering a low cry, she stood upon the threshold,
rigid as one petrified.

CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

"SILENCE FOR SILENCE!"

"_You_!"

It was the only word which the girl uttered, but its tone showed her
horror and indignation.

The green-shaded light was, she saw, switched on at the writing-table,
and as she entered, there before her, seated in her father's chair, was
the man who had posed as Frank's friend, "Captain Wetherton!"

As she had slowly opened the door he had raised his head, pale and
startled.  But only for a second.  When he recognised who it was, he
rose and, bowing, smiled with perfect _sangfroid_.

He had entered the house with the false latch-key which he had had made
from the wax impression he had taken of the key which Gwen had carried
on that night of the false assignation.  His only fear had been,
however, a meeting with the girl Laura.

Now that he saw that it was not she, he only smiled triumphantly.

"Yes," he said simply.  "It's me!  Are you very surprised?"

Instantly she recognised that, upon the blotting-pad, was lying open the
precious document which she herself had typed.  He had opened the
drawer, abstracted it, and read it.

He, her enemy, knew their secret!

"By what right, pray, are you here, sir?" she demanded, advancing into
the room boldly, and facing him.

"I have no right.  I'm here just by my own will," was his quick, defiant
response.

"This is my father's house, and I shall alarm him," she said
determinedly.  "You have no right thus to pry into his private affairs!"

"I have to decide that, Miss Griffin," he said, as over his dark face
spread that evil smile she remembered so well.

Having risen from the chair, he had now advanced closely to her.  She
noticed that he wore thick woollen socks over his boots, so as to muffle
his footsteps, while upon his hands were a pair of grey _suede_ gloves
which appeared too large for him.  Jim Jannaway had been a man of many
precautions, ever since his finger-prints had been taken on a certain
memorable day at Ipswich police-station, prior to his conviction.

"But," he laughed, examining her from head to toe, "you really look
charming, my dear little girl--even better than when in your walking
kit.  Why!" he exclaimed, pointing across the room.  "Why--what's that--
over there?"

She turned suddenly, taking her eyes off him for an instant, but saw
nothing.  His ruse succeeded, for that instant was sufficient for him to
slip behind her and close the door, turning the key in the lock.

"I must apologise for doing this in your own house, Miss Griffin, but I
fear that we may be overheard," he said.  "Now I want to have a very
serious chat with you."

"I wish to say nothing to you, sir," she replied drawing herself up
haughtily, the train of her pretty gown sweeping the floor.  "I only
demand to know what you are doing here, reading my father's papers."

"And suppose I refuse to tell you--eh?" he asked, raising his brows.

"Then I shall scream, and alarm the household.  They will hand you over
to the police."

"And if you were so ill-advised as to do that, Miss Griffin," answered
the fellow impudently, advancing a step nearer to her, and looking
straight into her face.  "Well--you would suffer very severely for it.
That's all."

"I'm prepared to take all the consequences," was her calm reply.

"Take care!" he said threateningly, in a low hoarse voice.  "I'm a
desperate man when driven into a corner."

"You mean rather that you're a coward when cornered," she said coldly.
"I am glad to have this opportunity of meeting, in order to repay you
for the gross injustice which you have done me."

"You're a little fool!" he said in a hard tone.  "Keep quiet, or
somebody will hear you."

"You entrapped me in that place.  I have now entrapped you--in my own
house," she exclaimed, with a look of triumph.

"Not for long," he said determinedly.  "Do you know that I could
strangle you where you stand, and still get clear.  Even though you
screamed.  I already have a rope on the balcony yonder, down into the
street.  But don't be alarmed.  I have no wish to injure you, my dear
little girl--not in the least.  We will just make an arrangement, and
cry quits."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, listen.  You've discovered me here, and you could give me away.
But I want to buy your silence."

"Buy my silence!" she exclaimed, staring at him.  "Yes.  Why not?  You
must buy mine.  Shall we not then be quits?"

She regarded him with a puzzled air.  He was her bitterest foe, and she
was wondering what was the true meaning of the suggestion.  She was
undecided, too, whether not to alarm the house, instead of parleying
further.  She had caught the fellow in her father's room wearing the
apparel of the modern burglar, therefore the police would, without
doubt, arrest him as such.

Suddenly her mind was made up, and with a quick movement she rushed
across to the electric bell beside the fireplace.

He gave vent to a short dry laugh of triumph, the reason of which was
next second plain.  The little porcelain push had been broken, and the
contact disarranged.

Jim Jannaway always took precautions.  He was a cool and calculating
scoundrel.

She turned upon him in quick anger, and he saw that she intended to
scream for help.

"One moment, if you please, Miss Griffin," he cried in a low voice.
"Just hear my suggestion before you raise the alarm and compel me to
depart hurriedly through the window.  A word now will save both of us a
great deal of unnecessary bother afterwards.  You're a very brave little
girl, and I admire you for it.  Most other girls, on seeing me here,
would have gone into hysterics, or fainted.  But you're a little
`brick.'"

"Thank you, this is really no time for compliments," was her cold,
resentful reply.  "Please say what you have to say, and quickly."

She had managed to cross the room half-way, and from where she now stood
she could see that the precious document she had typed lay open at its
last page.  The fellow had evidently read it all!

"Well," he said, in that easy-going manner of his that she found so
extremely irritating.  "As far as I can at present discern, Miss
Griffin, the game is a drawn one.  I can quite--"

"I consider it blackguardly impertinence on your part to enter my
father's house at night, and read his private papers," she protested,
her face pale and determined.

"My dear girl, to me your opinion of my actions really doesn't matter,"
he laughed.  "I wanted to discover something, and have adopted the
easiest means of doing so."

"Even at risk of being arrested?"

"Oh, I shan't be arrested," he laughed.  "Don't think I'm afraid of
that.  Why, my dear girl, perhaps you wouldn't believe it, but this
isn't the first time I've been in this very room.  I know what's in all
those drawers yonder, and even the balance in your father's banker's
pass-book."

"You've been here before!" gasped the girl astounded.  "How did you get
in?"

"Why, with your own key.  It was easy enough.  Your servants never bolt
the front door.  They really ought to be more careful, you know," he
laughed.

She hesitated for a moment, and in that slight hesitation he, crafty
malefactor that he was, recognised that he had triumphed.

"I may presume, I suppose, that you've read that document upon the
writing-table?" she asked a moment later.

"I have--every word of it," he replied, with a polite bow.

"That is why you came here?"

"It was.  I really expected to experience greater trouble in finding it.
I opened only three drawers before coming across it."

"Probably you'd like a copy of it," she said, with bitter sarcasm.

"Thank you, no.  I have a very excellent memory, and can recollect all I
require.  Besides, I've taken a few notes," was the bold and defiant
answer, "All I would request of you, my dear girl, is to keep a still
tongue in your head, go up to bed, and forget all about this unexpected
meeting.  Such a course will be much the best for you, I assure you."

"You--my enemy, are trying to advise me as a friend--eh?  This is really
amusing!  I tell you quite frankly that I intend to give you over to the
police.  You cleverly entrapped me, and now from me you may expect no
clemency."

"I want none," he laughed.  "But if I'm arrested, your friend, `Red
Mullet,' shall also see the inside of a prison again.  I promise you
that."

"He is innocent of this burglary," she said.

"But he isn't innocent of certain other little matters about which
Scotland Yard will be only too delighted to know," replied the fellow,
with an evil grin.  "So if you don't want him to go to `quod'--and he's
been pretty good to you, I think--you'd better remain silent about
to-night.  And there's the other matter--the--"

And he paused, and looked straight into her face, without concluding.

"Well?" she asked in a hard voice, holding the train of her robe with
one hand, and still facing him boldly.  "And what is the other matter,
pray?"

"I wish to tell you quite plainly that if you choose to be a little
fool, you'll take the consequences.  They'll fall on you, and pretty
heavily too.  Trust me to escape them."

"And I tell you that I intend to be a little fool, as you so politely
put it," was her fearless response.  "It is my duly to my father to go
at once and tell him of my discovery.  And I will!"

"Very well," he answered quite calmly, his evil eyes still fixed upon
hers.  "Go.  You are perfectly at liberty.  To me, it is of no great
consequence, but to you it will mean both the ruin of your reputation
and the loss of your lover!"

"How?" she gasped quickly, her face in an instant as pale as death.

"How?" he echoed in a fierce low whisper, advancing until he was close
to the girl.  "Cannot you see that I shall tell Frank Farquhar the truth
of your absence from your home--that you met me, and stayed with me in
those rooms!"

"You scoundrel!" she cried, drawing away from him, her cheeks flushed
with sudden anger.  "You threatened this before--you despicable coward,
to thus try and take advantage of a woman's good name!  You destroyed
that false telegram, so that I should not have it to show as proof!"

"You could get a copy from the post-office, I daresay," he laughed
airily.  "But I merely make plain what is my intention, and that's why
I've come to the conclusion that the game between us is a drawn one."

"Your threats have no terror for me!" she exclaimed, turning fiercely
upon him.  He saw that in her big eyes was determination and defiance,
and was surprised.

"Then shout away, my dear girl--scream the house down, if you like," he
laughed coolly, as though with utter unconcern.  "But just let me put
things straight again first."  Then walking to the writing-table he took
the translation of the decipher, replaced it in its drawer, and relocked
it with a key he drew from his pocket.

His coolness was amazing, his cunning, extraordinary.  The long window
leading to the balcony over the portico was ajar.  He had fixed a thin
silken rope to the railings ready for escape to the street in case of
necessity.

"Your conduct is abominable!" she ejaculated.  "What harm have I done
you that I should deserve this?"

"My dear girl, my conduct is only abominable of necessity, I assure
you," he argued with an impudent smile.  "Our compact is simple enough.
You do not wish to lose the man you love.  Indeed, why should you?"

"Ah! why indeed?" she cried.  "I have you alone to thank for all the
evil suspicions cast upon me."

"You have told them nothing--of course.  You're far too clever for
that--eh?" he remarked, standing easily before her with his hands in his
pockets.  "Besides, what could you say?"

"I could say nothing," she replied bitterly.  "I only know that you lied
to me, by posing as Frank's friend."

"My dear little girl," he answered with an arrogant laugh.  "I was
compelled to tell you a fairy-story, because--well, shall I tell you the
truth?--because I was so very anxious for the loan of your latch-key."

"Then why was I kept there a prisoner?  Why did that red-faced
blackguard come to me, and threaten me?"

"I had nothing whatever to do with that.  I was not there," he
protested.

"You enticed me into the hateful place by saying that Frank was in
hiding there," she replied firmly.

"For the reason I have already explained.  I apologise.  Can I do more,
Miss Griffin?"

"Apologise!" she echoed in a hoarse whisper.  "You apologise!  I wish
for no apology!"

"But you desire your own happiness, and can secure it, providing I am
silent," he said in a low, clear deliberate voice.  "Think what it would
mean to you if you gave the alarm--the wrecking of your own life, and
the arrest of your friend Mullet!  But I give you perfect liberty to
choose your future course of action.  I have no wish to coerce you."

"You could not, even if you wished!" she declared, yet through her brain
surged thoughts of what the loss of Frank would mean to her.

The man before her was a blackguard.  He had shown himself as such.
With perfect coolness he could besmirch her fair name in such a manner
that it could never again be cleared.

At that moment the girl was fighting for her own honour as well as her
father's secret which this man had gained.  It was a secret no longer--
it could never be.  Their enemies had triumphed!

She set her teeth hard, and tried to think.

Jim Jannaway was quick to notice her change of manner.

"Remember," he remarked, "one word to your father regarding this visit
of mine, and your lover and your father shall know the truth!"

"They will know whatever lies you invent regarding me!" she said in a
voice of intense bitterness.

He only shrugged his shoulders and smiled.  She, a mere innocent girl,
had no chance against his quick intellect, sharpened as it had been by
years of crafty cunning and double dealing.  To the "crooks" and
silk-hatted adventurers of London the very name of Jim Jannaway was
synonymous of all that was perfection in kid-gloved blackguardism.

"Well," he said a moment later, "I haven't time for further argument,
Miss Griffin.  I'm sorry I can't stay longer.  Perhaps the front door
would be a less conspicuous exit for me."

And so saying he stepped out upon the balcony, untied the silken rope
from the railing, rolled it up swiftly, and placed it in his pocket.

A moment later he was again standing before her.

She stood glaring at him with a look of bitter hatred, while he
recognised that her lips were already effectually sealed.

She dare not risk the suspicions which he could with a word place upon
her.  Hence he, alas! held her in his power!

"Remember!" he said, "I shall say nothing until you dare to give me
away.  It is a compact between us.  Silence for silence!"

Then, without further word, he moved across to the door, unlocked it,
and next second had disappeared noiselessly down the stairs.

And with him had gone the great secret of the hiding-place of the
treasure of Israel which her father believed to be his--and his alone!

The girl cast herself into a chair, and gave way to a paroxysm of tears.

Jim Jannaway and his friends had again triumphed.

CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

SHOWS FURTHER COMPLICATIONS.

At nine o'clock next morning the hunch-backed Doctor, pale and eager,
was closeted with the Professor, to whom he related what he had
witnessed while watching outside the house in Berkeley Square on the
previous night.

In consequence of this, the good-looking Laura was summoned to the
study, closely questioned, and returning impudent answers, was summarily
dismissed and left the house.

"So it is Sir Felix Challas who is desirous of ascertaining our secret,"
remarked Aminger Griffin, greatly surprised, "He is such a great
churchman, and such a high-minded philanthropist, that I can hardly
believe that he should employ such methods.  Why, only this very week I
saw in the papers that he has made a fourth donation to Guy's Hospital
of two thousand pounds."

"He is a swindler, hiding himself beneath the cloak of religion,"
declared Diamond emphatically.  "I have seen Mullet this morning, and he
has promised to call and have a chat with you.  He will come to-day, I
expect."

"Well," exclaimed the Professor with some hesitation, and with a smile
of triumph upon his lips, "we need have no further fear of our enemies,
Doctor, for we have forestalled them.  Yesterday I succeeded in
deciphering the whole record in Ezekiel, and convincing myself of the
existence of a similar cipher in Deuteronomy.  I have here the complete
translation in English."  And he placed the document in the Doctor's
trembling hands.

The ugly little man read it through eagerly, and then sat staring
straight into the Professor's face.

"Then the secret of the treasure of Israel is revealed!" he gasped in a
low voice, as though fearing to be overheard.  "But is it not probable
that your servant listened, and heard you tell Miss Gwen the manner in
which the cipher could be read?"

"No doubt.  But fearing that, in a matter of this magnitude I might be
the victim of treachery, I deviated slightly from the correct key, in
such a manner as to throw out the whole reading!" laughed the Professor.
"I told my daughter so afterwards."

"Mullet has told me a good deal.  I stayed with him in his rooms last
night," the Doctor said.  "It appears that Sir Felix Challas's methods
are, on occasions, so unscrupulous as to be criminal.  In his employ he
has a dangerous scoundrel named Jim Jannaway--a thief and gaol-bird,
though his exterior is that of a gentleman.  He has served several terms
of imprisonment for burglary.  To this man the philanthropist of
Berkeley Square, who received a Baronetcy for his good deeds, leaves his
dirty work.  From what Mullet told me I should not be surprised that it
was he who arranged that your servant should spy upon you."

"Mullet is also an outsider, is he not?" remarked the Professor with
some suspicion.

"Of course, but of necessity.  Though he may rob the rich, he prides
himself on never having done a mean action to a poor person, or a
woman."

"Ah!  Doctor," laughed Griffin.  "I see you believe in degrees of
crime--eh?"

"In this case, yes.  `Red Mullet' has greatly assisted us.  It was he
who telegraphed to me from his retreat in Kent to watch the house in
Berkeley Square.  And now he has explained to me many points which were
hitherto mysteries."

"We need have no fear of our enemies now," remarked the Professor, as at
that moment Gwen, looking fresh in her white blouse and navy serge
skirt, entered the room brightly and greeted the ugly little hunchback.
"It only remains for us to call Farquhar into conference, and decide how
we shall act.  Somebody should proceed at once to Jerusalem, decide the
exact spot, and purchase the land.  We can have time for further
operations when once the land on both sides of the hill is ours.
Farquhar has promised that Sir George will find the necessary funds for
that, if we so desire."

Gwen, holding her breath, walked to the window and looked out upon the
gloomy London street.

Her position was hideous.  Her father believed that the great secret was
his--and his alone.  Frank would believe it--and by remaining silent she
would be misleading her lover into a false sense of security.

She knew, alas! that their enemies would hesitate at nothing--that the
Treasure of Israel was already lost to them--lost to the Jews for ever!

With her back turned to her father and his visitor she stood listening,
her clenched hands trembling.  What could she do?  How could she act?

Suppose she told the truth, and bore the inevitable blow?

"It's certainly fortunate that you did not explain to Miss Gwen the
actual mode of deciphering the record," the Doctor was remarking, "for
Sir Felix and Haupt, at any rate, cannot gain the knowledge we have
gained."

"Sir Felix--who--dad?" inquired the girl, turning quickly.

"Sir Felix Challas, my dear," was the Professor's reply.  "The Doctor
has discovered that it is he who is our enemy.  He poses as a great
philanthropist as you well know.  His portrait is in this week's
_Tatler_--over yonder."

The girl crossed quickly, took up the paper, and searched the pages
eagerly.  Then when her gaze fell upon the picture, the journal nearly
fell from her nerveless fingers.

She recognised the brutal, red-faced man who had been her inquisitor,
and who would have struck her had not Mullet interfered, and stood her
champion.

Beneath the portrait was a laudatory notice of the hypocrite's noble
contribution to the funds of charities of London.

"You see, Doctor," her father went on, not noticing the girl's blanched
face and horror-struck eyes, "Erich Haupt will only be entirely misled
by the statement I made to Gwen.  By using the cipher in that manner, he
will obtain a jumble of Hebrew letters which represent nothing.  No.  We
need not fear Sir Felix and his anti-Semitic views in the least.  We
alone know the place of concealment of the sacred treasure of Israel."

"I have already telegraphed to Farquhar at Horsford.  He should be here
before twelve."

"And when he comes, we shall decide what to do," remarked the Professor.
"I think he should go out at once to Palestine.  Only one of us must go
to purchase the land, otherwise suspicion might be excited.  And if so,
then good-bye to all our chances."

"Sir Felix, if he cannot obtain the secret, may endeavour to upset our
plans out there," remarked Gwen.  "He is a man of wealth and power,
dad."

"But he does not possess the information which we possess.  Professor
Holmboe's secret is now ours--and ours alone!" he declared triumphantly.

"Could we not get Mr Mullet to assist us, dad?" suggested the girl
puzzled to distraction as to how she should act.  She was divided
between her love and her duty.

"No.  He will only help us in his own way," responded Doctor Diamond.

The girl walked back to the long window which led out upon the balcony--
the window which Jim Jannaway had been prepared to use as an emergency
exit--and stood with her hands clasped behind her back, while the two
men further discussed what they believed to be a most satisfactory
situation.

The land on both sides of the mount must be purchased in secret, they
agreed, and not a word must leak out regarding the discovery until
actual operations had commenced.  Then the Professor was to launch his
startling statement upon the world in the form of an article in the
_Contemporary_.  After the purchase of the land, the Professor, the
Doctor, and an engineer were to go out to Jerusalem and make secret
investigation.  The surveyor, whom Griffin proposed to send out with
Farquhar to make secret survey upon the measurements contained in the
cipher, was a young man in business at Richmond, a friend of his, to
whom he proposed to give a small interest in the syndicate.

"We are agreed, I suppose, Doctor, that at all hazards the most sacred
relics and the archives of the Kingdom of Israel which are no doubt
preserved there, shall be restored to the Jews?"  Griffin said.

"Most certainly," was Diamond's reply.  "This man Challas intends, it
seems, to revenge himself upon the Jews by desecrating the treasure."

"But, dad!" cried the girl, "surely he would never be allowed to
desecrate sacred relics!"

"If he discovered them upon land he had purchased he might very easily
destroy them before he could be prevented," her father pointed out.
"There lies the great danger.  Fortunately, however, he will be unable
to do that.  Farquhar must go out to Jerusalem at the earliest possible
moment.  And I'll get young Pettit, the surveyor, up from Richmond this
afternoon."

Gwen's face was blanched, she stood rooted there, still staring down
into the street, inexpressibly gloomy that winter's morning.  Lights
were in the rooms of some of the houses opposite, while outside Notting
Hill Gate Station, at the end of the road, the big electric globes were
shedding their brilliance, as they did each night.

How should she act?  She was calmly contemplating what might occur.  Her
head reeled, for she had not closed her eyes since she had last stood in
that room face to face with her enemy--the man who had filched the
secret from them and departed.

His threats rang in her ears.  If she revealed the truth, then Mullet
would be arrested, and in addition a foul lie, which alas! she could not
refute, would be told both her lover and her father!  She shuddered and
held her breath.  Had she not already promised secrecy to Mullet!  Could
she, after his self-sacrifice, deliberately bring ruin upon him?

No.  She was hemmed in on every side by the impossible.  And even if she
told the truth, it was now too late, alas!  Sir Felix Challas, great
financier that he was, had agents in all the capitals, and possessed
secret channels of information against which their little combination
would be utterly powerless.  Alas! they were now only tilting at the
wind.

That red-faced blatant parvenu, that Jew-hating hypocrite who did his
evil doings behind his moneybags, had triumphed!

Whatever she said, whatever allegation she made against the Baronet or
Jim Jannaway--for she now for the first time had learnt his name--would
make no difference.  The bitterness of it all must fall upon her, and
her alone.

Her young heart was crushed, stifled, broken.

If she spoke, or if she were silent, it was the same--she must play her
lover false.

CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE VICTIM OF SHAME.

The tall red-moustached man stood in the dining-room with Gwen Griffin.

She had seen his approach from the window, and dashing downstairs, had
admitted him.  Taking him at once into the room she had closed the door,
and in a few brief hasty words had admitted him to her confidence.

"What!" he cried, staring at her in amazement.  "Jim Jannaway has dared
to come here, to read the documents, and then to threaten you with this!
Look here, Miss Griffin, the matter is much more serious for you than I
had imagined.  Those fellows, Felix and Jim, will stick at nothing, but
they shall not ruin your reputation.  Leave that to `Red Mullet'."

"But, Mr Mullet," she cried, "he threatens your arrest if I tell my
father the truth.  Besides, have I not promised secrecy to you?"

"My dear child," he said, "go at once and tell your father the truth.
Then leave the rest to me."

"But what will he think of me?" she asked, her face blanched to the
lips.

"Let your father--indeed, let the world--think what it will of you, Miss
Griffin.  You are an innocent victim of the avarice of these men, just
as I am.  I stood your friend that day when I released you from
bondage--and I will stand your friend still!"

"They possess our secret."

"That is a most unfortunate fact," he admitted.  "Still we must try and
defy them.  I will do my best.  But if I fail," he added in a low
earnest voice, "it will not be for want of endeavour, I promise you.  I
tried to save you and your father once--and I will try again.  We must
win even if we make some sacrifice."

"But do not imperil yourself," she urged.  "Do not, I beg of you, Mr
Mullet."

"I shall act with both firmness and discretion, and if we but unmask
these blackguards who have tried again to entrap you, we shall have done
a service to society at large.  Unfortunately," he added with a sigh,
"my own hands are none too clean."

"You will see my father.  The Doctor is upstairs with him," she urged.

"No--later!" he exclaimed hastily.  "At the present moment not a second
is to be lost.  I must go to them, and see what we can do by firmness.
Tell your father of Jim's visit here, but do not say you have seen me,
and say nothing regarding the past--remember, nothing.  Promptness of
action is now our only safeguard."

And leaving the girl standing there bewildered, he passed out of the
room, and next second she heard the front door closed behind her.

Of his power to avert the natural flow of events she had but little
confidence.  He was beneath the thumb of Sir Felix Challas, therefore,
how could he hope to wrest back the secret which Jim Jannaway had
learned?

In any case, the good-looking scoundrel to whom a woman's honour was of
no account, would carry out his threat, and Frank must, ere long, turn
his back upon her, as he had done before.

Her heart beat fast, and she placed her hand upon her breast, as if to
stay its anxious throbbing.

Mullet, though an adventurer himself, was right.  It was her duty to
tell her father the truth, and not allow him to continue further in that
sense of false security.

Yet at what cost must her statement be made!  At cost, alas! of her own
honour.

Ere long she would not be able to look Frank in the face, for Jim
Jannaway would lie so circumstantially that both her father and he would
believe it to be the shameful truth.  Mullet would not admit the past.
"Say nothing regarding the past," he had urged!  He had some strong
motive in this--a motive that must, of itself, prevent him revealing the
truth, and clearing her of the blemish placed upon her good name.

Besides, would Frank ever accept the excuses made for her by a man of
"Red Mullet's" stamp?  The actual truth was an ugly one.  She had been
absent from home, and on returning, had refused to give an account of
where she had been.  And now it was to be revealed that she had lived in
"Red Mullet's" chambers!

She burst into a flood of tears on recognising her own utter
helplessness.

Circumstances were entirely against her.  She could never hope to defend
her own honour in the face of such dark facts.

Suddenly she dried her eyes with a great effort, and looked at herself
in the big mirror at the back of the high, old-fashioned carved
sideboard.  She started to notice how pale she was, and how dark beneath
the eyes.

Then slowly she went out of the room, and up the stairs, in obedience to
her protector, "Red Mullet."

Hardly knowing what she did, or what words escaped her, she re-entered
the study where her father, her lover and the Doctor were in
consultation, and standing before them, described the scene that had
occurred in that room during the night-hours.

The three men, when they heard the astounding truth, started to their
feet with one accord.

"You!--Gwen--my daughter!" gasped the old Professor in a voice of bitter
reproach.  "And you have allowed this--you allowed that man to gain our
secret without alarming me!  I am ashamed of your conduct--heartily
ashamed!"

"I could not, father," answered the girl, panting and pale-faced, "I--I
was afraid--I feared him!"

She raised her eyes to Frank's, and saw in them a look of blank
disappointment.  She now fully realised that if she had raised the
alarm, the communication of the secret to Challas might perhaps have
been prevented.  She pointed to the broken bell-push, and explained how
before her entry there, the resourceful scoundrel had disarranged it as
a precaution.

Diamond paced the room in a frenzy of despair.  The little man raised
his clenched fists above his head and uttered curses upon his enemies,
for he saw that through his fingers at the very moment of success, there
had slipped a colossal fortune.

"Frank!" exclaimed the girl, in a low piteous voice, standing before him
with bent head, "forgive me.  I--I was helpless last night.  I am
helpless now!"

"Forgive!" echoed her father in furious anger.  "How can he ever forgive
you--how can I forgive you?  You might have been in fear of him at that
moment, but upon your own showing, you knew him, is not that so?"

"Yes, father," she faltered.  "I--I did know him."

"Then you have had dealings with our enemies before!"  Frank cried, all
his dark suspicions now suddenly aroused by her fears and apprehensions.

"I told them nothing, though they tried to force me to."

"You knew this man, Jim Jannaway, while I was in Copenhagen," said
Frank, his eyes fixed upon her very seriously.  "Come, tell the truth,
Gwen."

She nodded in the affirmative, and unable to utter another word, burst
again into tears.

And the three men standing there saw that her tears were tears of shame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two hours later, Frank Farquhar, dark-faced and determined, stood in one
of the smaller rooms in Sir Felix Challas's house in Berkeley Square,
while before him, seated easily on the edge of the table, was Jim
Jannaway.

"Well, Mr Farquhar," he said, "what you've just stated is to a certain
extent correct.  I have no reason whatever to hide the truth, now that
you have come to me and demanded it.  The investigation of Holmboe's
story has simply been a matter of business in which the keenest wits
win.  We have won."

"By trickery--and by a burglary, for which Professor Griffin intends to
have you arrested."

Jannaway laughed impudently in his face.

"My dear sir, pray don't be foolish," he answered, "why it was Miss
Griffin herself who let me in, and who showed me her father's decipher
of the message in Ezekiel.  And if you don't believe me," he added,
"here's the telegram which the sent me."

Frank took the telegram he handed him, and read the following words:
"Shall place candle at my window at two to-morrow morning.  Come.  Have
something very important to communicate.  Love, Gwen."

Love!  The word danced before Frank's eyes.

"Why should she be acting in your interests, Mr Jannaway, and not in
her father's?  That seems to me a very curious point," he said, for want
of something else to say.

"There was a reason--a very strong reason," replied the fellow, with a
mysterious grin, pretending, of course, to be unaware that Farquhar was
the girl's lover; "the little girl is a particular friend of mine."

"What do you mean?" gasped Frank, his face paler.

"Well--what I say.  Need I be more explicit?  It is not usual for a man
to imperil a girl's reputation, is it?"

"Come," said Frank; "tell me the truth.  Is your acquaintance an
intimate one?"

The fellow nodded and laughed.  He plainly saw the result of his cruel
aspersions upon the girl's character.

"I don't believe it," declared Frank.

"Oh! perhaps you are her friend also!" exclaimed Jannaway with a smile.
"If so, you'd better ask her if she did not remain with me during a
recent absence from home.  I wanted her to go back, but she seemed
afraid, and preferred life in a bachelor's chambers."

"You lie!" cried Frank, crimson with anger.

"No, not so quick, Mr Farquhar," exclaimed the scoundrel coolly.  "Just
inquire of her, that's all.  Ask her if she did not meet me in secret
late one night, and whether she didn't remain with me in my chambers off
Oxford Street.  She will certainly not have forgotten the incident," he
added with meaning sarcasm.

"I don't believe you!" declared Frank, "but even if she had, you're a
cursed blackguard for giving her away!"

"You asked me for the truth, and you've got it!" was Jim Jannaway's
response.  "Anything more you wish to know?  If so, I am entirely at
your service."

It was one of Jannaway's characteristics that the more angry he became,
the more cool was his exterior.

"I want to know nothing from one who is a liar, a thief, and a slanderer
of women," Frank responded, in a hard, bitter voice.

"I understand that the object of your visit was to inquire the reason
why I called so early this morning at Pembridge Gardens.  I have simply
replied that I called at the Professor's in response to this
invitation," and he indicated the telegram which he still held in his
hand, and which, if the truth were told, he had taken the precaution to
send to himself, as additional evidence against the innocent girl whom
he had all along intended should be his victim.

"And you repeat your allegation that Miss Gwen has been your guest at
your chambers for several days--eh?  Remember, if untrue, such a
statement is actionable."

"I repeat it.  And I ask you to satisfy yourself as to its truth by
asking her.  But," he added, "I may as well tell you that the little
girl is annoyed with me just now for betraying her father's secret to my
friends.  Yet, after all, as I've already said, it was only a matter of
business, and with business women ought never to meddle.  They always
burn their fingers."

"And your friends--that is Sir Felix Challas and his associates--intend,
of course, to profit by this secret which you've stolen--eh?" asked
Frank, his face darkening.

"That's their affair--not mine."

"I hear that you bribed the parlour-maid at Pembridge Gardens--the
crafty scoundrel that you are!"

"That's it!"  Jim laughed, "and I squeezed the cook, and kissed the
kitchenmaid!  Anything else?  No, I really haven't any more time to
waste, Mr Farquhar.  All I need add is, that if you doubt my statement,
please ask Miss Griffin herself."

CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

REVEALS A WOMAN'S FACE.

A cold bleak afternoon in Kensington Gardens.  The frozen gravelled path
was lightly powdered with snow, and against the bare black branches
showed the pale yellow light of the wintry afternoon.  Bent to the
biting wind, men and women, wrapped to the ears, passed up the Broad
Walk, and among them was Gwen Griffin, a lonely, solitary, sweet-faced
little figure, neat with her black bow in her hair, her blue doth skirt,
fur bolero, and fur toque and muff to match.

She walked very slowly, her sad eyes cast upon the ground.  She always
went into the gardens when she wanted to think.  Near Hyde Park Gate,
she turned into one of the narrow and little-frequented paths, for she
wanted to be alone.

That afternoon the great blow which she dreaded had fallen, and her
young heart so light and happy, was crushed and broken.

Frank Farquhar had sent her, by messenger from Half Moon Street, a
cruel, brief letter, in which he told her plainly of the allegation
which Jim Jannaway had made, and explaining that, in consequence, he
must ask her to consider their engagement at a complete end.

Its rigid formality showed that he believed every word of that vile
calumny.  Ah! if only Mullet would speak!  If only he would consent to
the truth being told.

But alas! though a fortnight had passed since his hurried departure from
Pembridge Gardens after hearing of the betrayal of the secret, he had
sent her no single word.  He was a will-o'-the wisp, gone abroad, in all
probability, in order to escape arrest.

For a fortnight, too, she had not seen Frank.  After her admission of
Jim Jannaway's visit, he had left the house in evident disgust and
anger, and had not returned.  He had not even written to her, for she
understood that he had gone abroad.  That afternoon, however, he had
sent her the note which for fifteen long anxious days she had been
dreading.

She sank upon one of the seats quite alone, yet within sound of the dull
roar of the traffic in Kensington Gore, and taking his letter from her
muff, re-read it, her vision half obscured by hot bitter tears.

"The scoundrel told such a circumstantial tale," she murmured to
herself, "that Frank has believed it without question.  Yet--yet if he
had come to me, and asked me, what could I have said?  It was true that
I stayed in that hateful place, even though against my will.  Ah!  I
wonder what foul lies he has told against me--what--"

And hiding her face in her muff, she burst again into a flood of tears.

Her sweet, bright countenance had, alas, greatly changed in those past
few weeks.  Instead of bearing the stamp of inward happiness, she was
now wan and pale, with thin cheeks and dark, deep-sunken eyes--the face
of a woman whose heart was troubled, and who existed in terror of the
future.

Both the Professor and Diamond--who was still a frequent visitor and had
long conferences with her father--had noticed the change.  But neither
had made any remark.  They attributed it to her heartfelt regret at not
having raised the alarm on finding Jannaway prying into their secret.

The girl's mind, racked by the tortures of conscience and frenzied by
the cruel calumnies uttered against her, was now strained to its
greatest tension.  She was utterly friendless, for even her father now
avoided her, and at meals treated her with a cool and studied aversion.
Instead of being petted and indulged as she had been all her life, she
was now shunned.  He asked of her no advice, nor did he invite her to
his study each evening to chat, as had been his habit ever since she had
left school.

One friend she possessed in the world--"Red Mullet," the adventurer who
posed as a mining engineer!  Where was he?  Ay, who could tell?

"That man threatened his arrest if I did not remain silent," she said,
speaking aloud to herself, her eyes fixed upon the bare, cheerless
prospect before her.  "I have told the truth, and already he has carried
out one of his threats.  Perhaps he will carry out the other.  Probably
he will, and then--and then I shall lose my only friend!  He may allege,
too, that because `Red Mullet' is my friend, he is my lover!  Ah!  I
wonder what shameful scandal he has told Frank!  I wonder!  Oh!  Why has
Frank not come to me for an explanation for proof of those abominable
lies uttered by a man whom he knows as a blackguard and a thief.  It is
cruel!" she sobbed, "cruel--too cruel!  Ah!  Frank, my own Frank, I love
you with all my heart--with all my soul!  You are mine, mine!" she
cried, raising her clenched hands to heaven in her frenzy of despair,
"and yet I have lost you--lost my father's great secret--lost
everything--_everything_!"

Her white lips moved, but no sound came from them.  Her eyes were
closed, her hands clenched tightly as there, with none to witness her
agony of soul, she implored the protection of her Maker and the clemency
of Providence in that, the greatest trial of all her life.

She prayed in deep earnestness for assistance and strength to withstand
the evil machinations of her enemies.

With Frank's departure, the sun of her existence had set.  The future
was only grey and darkening, like the dismal, dispiriting scene that
spread before her.

Love and life were, alas, lost to her for ever.

Away over those leafless trees, eastward beyond Hyde Park and Grosvenor
Square, a curious scene was, at that moment, being enacted in the house
of her enemies.

Challas, stout and pompous, was standing with his back to the library
fireplace, while in an armchair near, sat the white-bearded old German
Professor.

"You see from this `wire' from Jim, that all goes along beautifully
Erich," the Baronet was saying.  "He has engaged a Turk to purchase the
land on both sides of the Mount, the price asked being a little bit
stiff--eight thousand pounds for the lot.  I `wired' him this morning to
close at the lowest price possible, and at the same time I've placed him
a credit of ten thousand at the Ottoman Bank in Jerusalem."

"Then by this time the deal is closed," remarked the old German, rubbing
his thin hands in satisfaction.  "Ah!  I wonder how our friend Griffin
now feels?"

"Yes," laughed Sir Felix, "thanks to Jim we obtained the whole secret
without the trouble of deciphering it.  That was a smart move of his to
capture the little girl as he did."

"Yes," laughed the old man, "it seems that we're on the straight road to
success."

"The road!" echoed the great financier.  "Why, by this time, I expect
the land is ours, and if so, I shall start myself on Saturday.  I mean
to keep my intentions `dark,' of course.  The papers will say that I've
gone to Vienna, for if it were known that I'd gone to Jerusalem there
are men in the City who would be keeping a wary eye on me.  They know
that when Felix Challas goes abroad, it's generally to see some good
thing or other.  That's the worst of this cursed popularity.  The public
eye is upon one the whole time."

As he spoke, the old butler tapped at the door, and handed him another
telegram, which he broke open eagerly.

"Ah!" he exclaimed after consulting a little note book which he took
from a drawer--the code which Jim always used.  "Another from Jim!  He's
closing at seven thousand eight hundred, the deeds to be signed
to-morrow.  The story he has told is that the land is to be used for
building purposes."

"I suppose the surveyor you sent out with him has fixed the exact spot?"

"Of course.  They did that four days ago.  It was a difficult task to
accomplish without attracting attention, but Jim succeeded.  He always
does!" added the Baronet with a grin.

"I understood that the Mount was nearly covered by the Jews' cemetery,"
remarked the German.

"So it is.  But the plots we want are fortunately rocky places, where
burial is impossible.  I think it a big stroke of luck--don't you?" he
added with a self-satisfied laugh.

"Certainly," was the German's response in his deep, guttural voice, "but
what of Mullet?  Have you heard anything of him lately?"

"Nothing.  He's abroad somewhere.  I believe Jim and he have quarrelled.
I only hope they won't get to serious disagreement--if they do it will
be very unpleasant for us all.  `Red Mullet' hasn't acted straight in
this affair at all.  He fell in love with Griffin's girl, I think--and
became heroic--like the chicken-hearted fool he is."

"You haven't any fear of him turning upon you, I suppose?"

"Fear of him!" laughed Sir Felix heartily.

"Why, my dear Erich, I could put him away for ten years, to-morrow, if I
wished, and fortunately he knows it.  No.  He'll keep a very still
tongue, never fear.  He still draws his money from Paris, which shows
that he doesn't intend mischief."

"Ah! that's all right," declared the Hebrew scholar, greatly satisfied.
"I--well, I've always had suspicions that he meant to play into
Griffin's hands."

"So he did, undoubtedly, but Jim and I were rather too clever for him."

At that moment the elderly butler re-entered with a card upon the
salver.

Sir Felix took it and his face changed in an instant.  His mouth was
open, and for a second he seemed speechless.

"Not at home--not at home," he snapped to the man.  "Never at home to
that person--you understand?"

"Yes, Sir Felix," replied the grave-faced servant, who bowed and
withdrew.

Erich Haupt noticed that the visitor, whoever it was, seemed a most
unwelcome one.

From the Baronet's subsequent movements the old German realised that he
wished to get rid of him.

Therefore, he rose and departed, promising to call next day, and hear
the latest report of Jim Jannaway's progress in Jerusalem.

Then, the instant Erich had left the house, Sir Felix rang for his
valet, a young Italian, giving him a note to take in a taxi-cab to his
office in the City and await a reply.

The man was gone an hour, during which time his master ascended to the
great drawing-room, and advancing cautiously to the window, peered out
into the grey twilight of the square.  He stood behind the curtains so
that any one watching the house from the outside could not observe him.
From his nervous anxiety and restless movements it was apparent that he
feared his unwelcome visitor might still be watching outside.

As he peered through the crack between the heavy curtains of blue silk
brocade and the window sash, his eyes caught sight of a figure, and he
sprang back breathless, his face white and drawn, as though he had seen
a ghost.

It was a ghost--a ghost of the past that had arises against him in that
hour of his greatest triumph.

The young Italian returned, and handed him a bulky letter which he
placed in his pocket without opening.  Then, having sent him forth with
a note to the Ritz Hotel, a mere excuse, he ran up to his dressing-room,
quickly exchanged his frock-coat and fancy vest for a suit of rough
tweed, and putting on a bowler hat, returned to the library.  Upon his
face was a haunted look of terror.  The unexpected had happened.

From his safe he took a small sealed packet of folded papers which he
opened and cast quickly into the fire, waiting in eager impatience until
all had been consumed.  Then, unobserved, he slipped out by the back in
the evening gloom, hurrying down the mews, and through into Hill Street,
where he hailed a hansom and drove quickly away.

For the ghost of the past was still watching, silent and hideous,
against the railings of Berkeley Square.

CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

CONTAINS A SURPRISE.

That short February day was indeed an eventful one, both for the rival
investigators, and for the whole Hebrew race.

Almost at that same hour when Sir Felix Challas left his London mansion
so hurriedly, and in such fear, "Red Mullet" was being conducted up a
long, wood-built, unpainted corridor where the uncarpeted floor was full
of holes and the broken windows were patched, to a small shabby little
reception-room--the waiting-room of the Sublime Porte, or Government
Offices at Constantinople.

A Turkish servant in a dingy red fez, handed him the usual formal cup of
blade coffee and cigarette, and he was left alone to await his audience
with the Grand Vizier of his Imperial Majesty, the Sultan.

It was not the first time in the course of his adventurous career that
he had had audience at the Sublime Porte.  He knew the shabbiness and
the decay of that great shed-like building, its lack of order, its
seedy-looking officials, and its altogether incongruous appearance as
the centre of the administration of a great empire.

Smoking the cigarette, he stood gazing thoughtfully out upon the rubbish
heap in the courtyard below.  Beyond, lay Pera, and the blue Bosphorus.
The room, with its bare walls, faded Oriental carpet, rickety
writing-table and few shabby chairs, was the apartment where the
Ambassadors of the Powers awaited audience of the Grand Vizier, or of
his Excellency, Tewfik Pasha, his Majesty's Minister for Foreign
Affairs.  A contrast indeed to the fairylike glories of the palace of
Yildiz.

Five minutes later, the tall, red-moustached Englishman was conducted to
a private room, shabby as was all at the Sublime Porte, where, at a
table, sat a benevolent white-bearded old gentleman in frock-coat and
fez, the Grand Vizier of the Sultan.

The high official greeted him in French, and having motioned him to a
chair on the opposite side of the table, said:

"I am greatly obliged to you, M'sieur Mullet.  I have read with intense
interest the document you gave me yesterday, and last evening I placed
the matter before his Majesty, my sovereign, at the Palace.  As you are
aware, his Majesty is always tolerant of other religions that are not
our Faith, and has ever been most lenient towards the Hebrew race.  This
discovery, and your statement that certain persons hostile to the Jewish
religion are in search of the supposed sacred relics, have both
interested him, and he has commanded me to tell you that inquiries have
been made by telegraph in Jerusalem.  It appears that a certain
Englishman named James Jannaway is staying at the Park Hotel, and is in
treaty with the owners of two plots of land at the base of the Mount of
Offence, one belonging to Poulios, a Greek, and the other to a certain
Hadj Ben Hassan, an Arab.  The Governor of Jerusalem reports that the
price is fixed, and only the contracts remain to be drawn."

"The man Jannaway, your Excellency, is the agent of Sir Felix Challas,"
declared Mullet.

"As you yourself have been when you have visited Constantinople to
obtain concessions from us on previous occasions, M'sieur!" remarked the
wily Turkish official.  "Why have you betrayed your employer?"

"For reasons which I have already explained in the document I handed to
you.  Your Excellency has always been extremely good to me personally,
and I deemed it but my duty to inform you of the secret excavations
about to take place in Jerusalem."

"You have no ulterior motive--eh?" asked the old man, fixing his eyes
keenly upon him.

"None whatever, your Excellency.  On the contrary, I shall be the
loser."

The Grand Vizier stroked his beard for a few moments in thoughtful
silence.  Then he said:

"His Majesty never fails to repay generously any service rendered him.
I may as well tell you he considers the rendering of this information a
very valuable service.  It might easily have happened that the most
sacred relics of the Hebrews could have been taken from our country in
secret by enemies of the Jews, a circumstance which would have caused
his Majesty the utmost annoyance and anger."

"Your Excellency has already satisfied yourself that I have told the
truth, I hope?"

"Certainly; during the night I have had several long telegrams from the
Governor of Jerusalem, all of which bear out your allegation of a secret
attempt about to be made to excavate in the Mount of Offence."

"And what action will the Ottoman Government take?" asked "Red Mullet,"
eagerly.

"His Majesty has already taken action," was the Grand Vizier's reply.
"This morning he signed an irade which I placed before him, prohibiting
the sale of any of the land of the Mount of Offence to any foreigner,
and forbidding any excavations or any investigation whatsoever being
made there."

"Red Mullet" was silent.  The situation was an unexpected one.  Such an
irade would prevent Griffin and Diamond--the rightful holders of the
secret--from taking any action, or making any investigation!  By
successfully opposing Challas, he had unfortunately also opposed
Professor Griffin!

"Is not that--well--well, just a little in opposition to his Majesty's
well-known policy of progress?  The Imperial irade forbids any
investigation whatever, I take it?"

"It forbids every investigation, of whatever nature," slowly replied the
white-bearded mouthpiece of the Sultan.  "Besides, there is a Jewish
cemetery in close proximity; we will not have that desecrated, by either
archaeologists or treasure-hunters."

"Then the secret cipher elucidated by Professor Griffin is to remain an
unsolved problem?"  Mullet said in a tone of great disappointment.

"For the present, yes," was the old gentleman's response.  "There are
many difficulties.  Suppose the sacred relics were really discovered, to
whom would they belong?"

"To the Hebrew race--and permit me to express the opinion, your
Excellency, that they should be searched for, and given over to the
Jews."

"I am not yet in a position to advise his Majesty upon that point.  For
the present, investigation and excavation are absolutely prohibited.
But, rest assured, that no one is more alive to the importance of
Professor Griffin's discovery than his Majesty himself.  Indeed, he
wishes for an exact transcript of this extraordinary record in your
Bible."

"That investigation by the anti-Semitic group should be prohibited, I
am, of course, much gratified, your Excellency.  But I do hope sincerely
that one day his Majesty will allow the right of research to the
rightful holders of the secret--who, as I have stated, are the
discoverer, Professor Griffin, and his friends."

"Including yourself, M'sieur Mullet--eh?"

"Yes, including myself, your Excellency," laughed the red-moustached
man.  "I would most humbly petition his Majesty, through you, to grant
to me the concession to search after the truth, if his Majesty ever
grants one."

"For the present, rest assured, Mr Mullet, that no permission will be
given to any one.  There are many eventualities to be considered, as
well as international complications.  But if any concession be granted
in the future, his Majesty will certainly accord it to you, in
consideration of the important and timely information which you have so
generously furnished to us."

"Then we need not fear the success of our enemies," laughed the tall
Englishman, with much gratification.

"Certainly not," answered the venerable old gentleman with a smile.
"See here," and he pointed to an open telegram before him, "this is the
last despatch from the Governor of Jerusalem, an hour ago.  By my orders
the Mount of the Offence is surrounded by a cordon of military, who have
instructions to allow no one to pass.  I have taken this precaution in
case the affair gets into the press, and the spot is visited by great
crowds, as it well may be.  So," laughed the Grand Vizier, "you have
to-day given your friend, M'sieur Jannaway, a rather unpleasant
surprise, I should fancy."

CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

IS THE CONCLUSION.

The anxiety of Erich Haupt may easily be imagined when, next day at the
Waldorf Hotel, he received a telegram from Challas, despatched from an
obscure place in Holland, saying that he had been called away
unexpectedly, and telling him to go to Berkeley Square and open any
telegrams that might be there.

He drove westward in a "taxi"--and found one message.  It was in code
from Jim Jannaway.  The old German had noticed where the financier kept
the code-book, and had but little difficulty in finding it.

"We have been given away," it ran.  "The spot is now guarded by
military.  Sale of land, and all investigation forbidden, and we have
received an intimation to leave Palestine at once.  Coming home."

Haupt's dismay and chagrin was complete.  He drove to the nearest
telegraph-office and "wired" to Jannaway that Sir Felix had been called
away.

This telegram, however, did not reach Jerusalem before Jim had left.
Therefore, when he alighted from a cab in Berkeley Square some days
later and knocked eagerly at the door of Sir Felix's house, he was
surprised to find it opened by a strange man.

When the hall door had closed behind him again, another man advanced,
and asked:

"I believe you are Mr Jannaway?"

"That's my name," replied Jim.  "Where's the gov'nor?  Who the dickens
are you?"

"I'm Inspector Attwell, Criminal Investigation Department," replied the
other, "and I arrest you, on a warrant granted in France, for the wilful
murder of Henri Laroche, banker of Rue de Rouen, Bordeaux, on December
6, 1907."

Jannaway stood as though turned to stone.  His face was bloodless, his
mouth wide-open.

"You--you've made a mistake--a very big mistake!" he managed to exclaim
with a sorry attempt to laugh.  "Where's the gov'nor--I mean Sir Felix
Challas?  I must see him at once."

"I'm afraid, Mr Jannaway, you'll never see him again," replied the
officer.  "Yesterday he was arrested in Breslau on a charge of
complicity with you in the crime at Bordeaux, but an hour later he
poisoned himself in the police-cell.  It'll all be in the papers this
afternoon, I expect."

"Suicide!" gasped the adventurer, utterly staggered.

"Yes, it seems that the dead man's daughter, Louise Laroche, whom you
believed you had also killed, though ruined and destitute, has searched
and found you both out, and made a startling statement to the Prefet de
Police of Paris.  Hence this warrant.  But, come along.  I must warn you
that any statement you make may be used against you upon your trial."

"Louise!" he gasped, staring straight before him.  He recollected that
woman's pale, pinched face at the corner of Berkeley Street that night--
that face which he had tried to forget and believe to be a mere fancy.
"Louise alive--a living witness!" he cried, plainly terrified.  "And
Felix always told me that he--he'd killed her with his own hand to
prevent her giving the alarm!  She came into the room and discovered me
at the safe, and she paid for it, I always thought, with her life.  Then
the young woman found dead must have been the servant!"

"Come, you'd better say no more," urged the officer, who, turning to the
man who had opened the door, said: "Just whistle a cab, Hall."

"No!" cried Jim Jannaway, hoarsely; "You--you shan't take me alive.  I--
I'll--I'll die game, too!" and before the inspector could prevent him he
had whipped out his revolver, placed the muzzle in his mouth and fired,
falling lifeless next second at the officer's feet.

God's wrath had fallen upon the evil-doers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next day--the very day when the great sensation of Sir Felix Challas's
tragic end, which every one recollects, appeared in the papers--"Red
Mullet" ascended the stairs at Pembridge Gardens, and grasped the hand
which the Professor stretched forth.

At his side stood Frank Farquhar, to whom he was introduced by the
Professor.

"I'm most delighted, Mr Mullet, to have the opportunity of at last
knowing you," Frank exclaimed.  "The Professor has to-day shown me your
letters and telegrams.  In the circumstances, the situation is as
satisfactory as it possibly can be.  We can only hope that the Sultan
will, after all the eventualities have been fully considered, grant to
you the concession to search.  It is fortunate, indeed, that you enjoy
the friendship of the Grand Vizier."

"Yes," laughed the tall fellow, "his Excellency has been good enough to
give me quite a lucrative appointment in the Department of Mines.  I'm
entering the Turkish service on the first of next month, when--well--I
hope I'll be able to lead an honest life in the future."

"Let's hope so," exclaimed the Professor.  "These revelations concerning
Sir Felix Challas and your friend Jannaway, in the papers to-day, are
most astounding."

"Not so astounding, Professor, as the story which I could tell.  But
both men are dead; therefore, for me to speak is now unnecessary.  They
were as crafty a pair of scoundrels as there were in the whole of
Europe: and from them, your daughter Miss Gwen, had, indeed, a very
narrow escape."

"Ah!" cried Frank.  "Tell us the whole truth--do!"

"Not without Miss Gwen's consent," he laughed.  "My daughter is out,"
Griffin said, "I expect her to return every moment.  She has been
expecting you daily."

"Red Mullet" smiled.

"Well, you know," he said, "your daughter, Professor, is my particular
little friend."

"And you have been her good friend and protector, if what she tells me
is correct," remarked her father.  "But I want to hear the story from
your lips.  She refuses to say anything."

"Because I bound her to secrecy.  It was imperative," he assured the
grey-haired man.  "And to you, Mr Farquhar," he said, "I must
apologise.  Some of my actions must have appeared mysterious--even
suspicious."

"Well," replied Frank, with some hesitation.  "I saw Jim Jannaway and--
and he told me a very strange story."

"He lied to you," said Mullet quickly.  "Ah!  I know!  He told you that
he was her lover--eh?  It was a lie--an infernal and cowardly lie!  Look
here, Mr Farquhar, I'm older than you, a good deal, and I'm a man who
respects a woman's honour--I've a daughter of my own in Diamond's care.
You know my little Aggie, to whom I'm devoted.  Well, I tell you upon my
oath--if you will accept the oath of an outsider like myself--that Miss
Gwen is innocent, and that she loves only you--has thought of only you--
and is as devoted to you as I am to my own dear child."

Frank hesitated, his eyes fixed upon the speaker.  He saw that the man
before him spoke the truth: that the evil-tongued coward who, cornered,
dare not face the music, had uttered foul lies.

At that moment the door suddenly opened, and Gwen in her warm furs stood
upon the threshold, her face full of surprise at seeing their visitor.

"Why!" she cried, "Mr Mullet!" and rushing forward, she grasped his
hand eagerly.

"I have told them, Miss Gwen, I have just told them the truth," he said
simply.

"Yes!" cried Frank Farquhar, stepping forward quickly, and taking the
girl's hand he kissed her upon the lips there, before both her father
and Mullet.  "I have misjudged you, my darling!" he said.  "Forgive me.
That man lied to me, and, alas, I believed him.  But to-day I know the
truth.  The death of that scoundrel Challas and his `cat's-paw' has
released Mr Mullet from his bondage.  He has now no further fear of
their reprisals, and has spoken--spoken the truth, and cleared you of
that shameful scandal which Jannaway placed upon you."

"Did I not tell you, Frank, that Mr Mullet had been my very best
friend?" said the girl simply, as, at that moment, the little Doctor
entered, fussy and excited as usual.

"I did not believe it once," he replied, "but now I know it to be the
truth."  And turning to the man who had staked his own liberty to
protect Gwen's honour, he grasped him warmly by the hand, uttering words
of heartfelt thanks.

And so again, and for ever, two hearts became united, and the dark
clouds of suspicion opened to give way to the sunshine of life and love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All these stirring events happened not quite a year ago.

Though the Ark and the sacred vessels still remain hidden beneath the
Mount of Offence till such time as his Majesty the Sultan thinks fit to
rescind his prohibition, one interesting circumstance has occurred,
namely, the joyous marriage at St Margaret's, Westminster, of Frank
Farquhar and Gwen Griffin, which was celebrated a couple of months ago.

The tragic and sensational end of Sir Felix Challas, followed by that of
his friend Jim Jannaway, was a mere one day's wonder, as are all the
sensations of our daily press nowadays.  The whole facts were never
revealed at the inquest, and the public quickly forgot the mystery
connected with the affair.

They are in ignorance of that colossal and startling secret which led to
the final _denouement_, or of the remarkable discovery by Arminger
Griffin.

Frank and Gwen have just returned from their sunny honeymoon in Italy
and Tunis to their pretty, semi-rural home at Chislehurst, whence every
day Farquhar comes to London to direct the fortunes of the Gavin group
of newspapers.

Only now, in these pages, is the truth revealed; a strange, astounding
truth which one day, ere long--for diplomatic representations are at
present being made by the Powers--must cause his Majesty the Sultan, and
his reformed Government, to reverse the former prohibition regarding it.
And for that Professor Griffin and his friends are patiently waiting.

Then will the words of the prophet be fulfilled the secret place of
concealment in the Mount of Offence be opened, and, after nearly two
thousand five hundred years, to its just ownership, that of the Hebrew
race, will be given back the most sacred relics of that colossal and
wonderful hoard, the Treasure of Israel.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great God Gold, by William Le Queux

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT GOD GOLD ***

***** This file should be named 41199.txt or 41199.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/1/9/41199/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
