The Project Gutenberg EBook of Historic Highways of America (Vol. 6), by 
Archer Butler Hulbert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Historic Highways of America (Vol. 6)
       Boone's Wilderness Road

Author: Archer Butler Hulbert

Release Date: October 22, 2012 [EBook #41143]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIC HIGHWAYS OF AMERICA, VOL 6 ***




Produced by Greg Bergquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









HISTORIC HIGHWAYS OF AMERICA

VOLUME 6




  [Illustration: CUMBERLAND GAP AND BOONE'S WILDERNESS ROAD]




  HISTORIC HIGHWAYS OF AMERICA
  VOLUME 6

  Boone's Wilderness Road

  BY
  ARCHER BUTLER HULBERT

  _With Maps and Illustrations_

  [Illustration]

  THE ARTHUR H. CLARK COMPANY
  CLEVELAND, OHIO
  1903




  COPYRIGHT, 1903
  BY
  THE ARTHUR H. CLARK COMPANY

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




CONTENTS


                                      PAGE
  PREFACE                               11
    I. THE PILGRIMS OF THE WEST         19
   II. THE FIRST EXPLORERS              48
  III. ANNALS OF THE ROAD               78
   IV. KENTUCKY IN THE REVOLUTION      145
    V. AT THE END OF BOONE'S ROAD      175




ILLUSTRATIONS


    I. CUMBERLAND GAP AND BOONE'S WILDERNESS ROAD       _Frontispiece_
   II. PLAT OF BOONESBOROUGH                                        97
  III. FILSON'S MAP OF KENTUCKY                                    119




PREFACE


The naming of our highways is an interesting study. Like roads the world
over they are usually known by two names--the destinations to which they
lead. The famous highway through New York state is known as the Genesee
Road in the eastern half of the state and as the Albany Road in the
western portion. In a number of cities through which it passes--Utica,
Syracuse, etc.--it is Genesee Street. This path in the olden time was
the great road to the famed Genesee country. The old Forbes Road across
Pennsylvania soon lost its earliest name; but it is preserved at its
termination, for the Pittsburger of today goes to the Carnegie Library
on the "Forbes Street" car line. The Maysville Pike--as unknown today as
it was of national prominence three quarters of a century ago--leading
across Ohio from Wheeling to Maysville (Limestone) and on to Lexington,
is known in Kentucky as the Zanesville Pike; from that city in Ohio the
road branched off from the old National Road. The "Glade Road" was the
important branch of the Pennsylvania or Pittsburg Road which led through
the Glades of the Alleghenies to the Youghiogheny. One of the most
singular names for a road was that of the "Shun Pike" between Watertown
and Erie, in northwestern Pennsylvania. The large traffic over the old
"French Road"--Marin's Portage Road--between these points on Lake Erie
and French Creek necessitated, early in the nineteenth century, a good
road-bed. Accordingly a road company took hold of the route and improved
it--placing toll gates on it for recompensation. Those who refused to
pay toll broke open a parallel route nearby, which was as free as it was
rough. It became known as the "Shun" Pike because those who traversed it
shunned the toll road.

Few roads named from their builders, such as Braddock, Forbes, Bouquet,
Wayne, Ebenezer Zane, Marin, and Boone preserved the oldtime name.
Indeed nearly all our roads have lost the ancient name, a fact that
should be sincerely mourned. The Black Swamp has been drained, therefore
there can be now no "Black Swamp Road." There are now no refugees and
the "Refugees Road" is lost not only to sight but to the memory of most.
Perhaps there is but one road in the central West which is commonly
known and called by the old Indian name; this is the "Tuscarawas Path,"
a modern highway in Eastern Ohio which was widened and made a white
man's road by the first white army that ever crossed the Ohio River into
what is now the State of Ohio.

One roadway--the Wilderness Road to Kentucky from Virginia and
Tennessee, the longest, blackest, hardest road of pioneer days in
America--holds the oldtime name with undiminished loyalty and is true
today to every gloomy description and vile epithet that was ever written
or spoken of it. It was broken open for white man's use by Daniel Boone
from the Watauga settlement on the Holston River, Tennessee, to the
mouth of Otter Creek on the Kentucky River in the month preceding the
outbreak of open revolution at Lexington and Concord. It was known as
"Boone's Trail," the "Kentucky Road," the "road to Caintuck," or the
"Virginia Road," but its common name was the "Wilderness Road." A
wilderness of laurel thickets lay between the Kentucky settlements and
Cumberland Gap and was the most desolate country imaginable. The name
was transferred to the road that passed through it. It seems right that
the brave frontiersman who opened this route to white men should be
remembered by this act; and for a title to this volume "Boone's
Wilderness Road" has been selected.

As in the case of other highways with which this series of monographs is
dealing, so with Boone's Wilderness Road: the road itself is of little
consequence. The following pages treat of phases of the story of the
West suggested by Boone's Road--the first social movement into the lower
Ohio Valley, Henderson's Transylvania Company, the struggle of the
Watauga settlement to prevent the southern Indians from cutting Kentucky
off from the world, the struggle of the Kentucky settlements against
the British and their Indian allies, the burst of population over
Boone's Road into Kentucky, and what the early founding of that
commonwealth meant to the East and to the West.

Boone and Harrod and their compatriots assured the world of the splendid
lands of Kentucky; Richard Henderson and his associates of the
Transylvania Company proved the questionable fact that a settlement
there could be made and be maintained. Boone's Road, opened for the
Transylvania Company, made a way thither. The result was a marvelous
westward movement that for timeliness, heroism and ultimate success is
without a parallel in our annals. When the armies of the Revolutionary
War are counted, that first army of twenty-five thousand men, women, and
children which hurried over Boone's little path, through dark Powell's
Valley, over the "high-swung gateway" of Cumberland Gap, and down
through the laurel wildernesses to Crab Orchard, Danville, Lexington,
and Louisville must not be forgotten. No army ever meant so much to the
West; some did not mean more to the East.

The author is greatly indebted for facts and figures to Thomas Speed's
invaluable study _The Wilderness Road_, and to other Filson Club
Publications, and for inspiration and suggestion to Mr. Allen's _The
Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_.

                                                              A. B. H.

Marietta, Ohio, May 20, 1903.




Boone's Wilderness Road


    _It is impossible to come upon this road without pausing,
    or to write of it without a tribute._

                                         --JAMES LANE ALLEN.




CHAPTER I

THE PILGRIMS OF THE WEST


No English colony in America looked upon the central West with such
jealous eye as Virginia. The beautiful valley of the _Oyo_--the Indian
exclamation for "Beautiful"--which ran southwesterly through the great
forests of the continent's interior was early claimed as the sole
possession of the Virginians. The other colonies were hemmed in by
prescribed boundary lines, definitely outlined in their royal charters.
New York was bounded by Lake Erie and the Allegheny and thought little
of the West. The Pennsylvanian colony was definitely bounded by the line
which is the western boundary line of that commonwealth today.
Carolina's extremity stopped at thirty-six degrees and thirty minutes.
Virginia's western boundary was not defined; hence the West was hers.

England herself was not at all sure of the West until after the fall of
Quebec; but the Treaty of Paris was soon signed and, so far as the
French were concerned, the colonies extended to the Mississippi. Then
Pontiac's bloody war broke out and matters were at a standstill until
Bouquet hewed his way into "the heart of the enemies' country" and, on
the Muskingum, brought Pontiac's desperate allies, the Delawares and
Shawanese, to terms.

But now, when the West was his, the king of England did a wondrous
thing. He issued a proclamation in the year 1763 which forbade anyone
securing "patents for any lands beyond the heads or sources of any of
the rivers which fall into the Atlantic Ocean from the West or
Northwest!" Thus Lord Hillsborough, British Secretary for the Colonies,
thought to checkmate what he called the "roving disposition" of the
colonists, particularly the Virginians. The other colonies were
restrained by definite boundaries; Virginia, too, should be restrained.

Hillsborough might as well have adopted the plan of the ignoramus who,
when methods for keeping the Indians from crossing the frontier were
being discussed, suggested that a strip of land along the entire western
frontier be cleared of trees and bushes, in the belief that the savages
would not dare to cross the open! Yet the secretary's agent set to work
to mark out a western boundary line which should connect the western
lines of Georgia and New York and so accomplish the limitation of
Virginia.

But the Virginians also acted. They sent an agent of their own, Thomas
Walker, to Fort Stanwix (Rome, New York) to treat with the Six Nations
for some of this very western land that Hillsborough was contriving to
keep them out of. For the king issued the proclamation in the interest
of the western Indians (and the annuities he received when the fur trade
was prosperous) who desired that the West should be preserved to them.
But what could be said if Virginia purchased the Indian's claim? Could a
king's proclamation keep the Virginians from a territory to which, for
value received, the Indians had given a quit-claim deed?

This famous Treaty of Fort Stanwix was held in the fall of 1768. Three
thousand Indians were present. Presents were lavished upon the
chieftains. The western boundary line crossed from the west branch of
the Susquehanna to Kittanning on the Allegheny River; it followed the
Allegheny and Ohio Rivers southwest to the mouth of the Great Kanawha.
Here it met Hillsborough's line which came up from Florida and which
made the Great Kanawha the western boundary of Virginia. Had the Fort
Stanwix line stopped here the western boundary line of the colonies
would have been as Lord Hillsborough desired. But Walker did not pause
here. Sir William Johnson, British Indian Agent for the Northern
District, who was "thoroughly versed in the methods of making profit by
his office," allowed Walker to extend the line so as to enclose
Virginia's prospective purchase; and the Tennessee River was made the
western boundary instead of the Great Kanawha. Thus Johnson at once
satisfied the claims of Virginia and the pride of the Six Nations, who
were still anxious to prove their long-boasted possession over the
Cumberland region, as well as their sovereignty over the hated Cherokee,
by thus formally disposing of the land. So everyone was satisfied--but
Hillsborough. And yet the Crown was compelled, finally, to approve the
Treaty of Fort Stanwix.

This treaty marks an epoch in the history of the central West, since,
thereby, nearly half of it became a portion of one of the Thirteen
Colonies. The other half, north of the Ohio River, remained in the
possession of the Indians who inhabited it.

It is remarkable how little known that great territory was which now
became a part of Virginia. This was largely because it was an
uninhabited country. The territory north of the Ohio River was filled
with Indian nations, some of whom had reigned there from times
prehistoric. This was likewise true of the country south, where the
great southern confederacies had held sway since white men came to this
continent. But between these inhabited areas lay a pleasant land which
any tribe would have gladly possessed had there not been so many rivals
for it. Consequently it became a "dark and bloody" land where a
thousand unrecorded battles were fought by Indians from both North and
South who had the temerity to come there to hunt, or by armies who were
hurrying through it in search of their foes who lived beyond. No Bouquet
had pierced through to the Cumberland to release prisoners who might
bring back reports of the land. No missionaries had carried their "great
and good" words to this battle ground of the Nations and returned with
tidings of its splendid meadows and their fertility. One or two
adventuresome explorers had looked there and brought back practically
all that the world knew of it. But they had never visited the most
pleasant portions and knew little, if anything, of its real value. And
all the Indians seemed to know was that it was a bloody border-land
where no tribe could hunt in peace; where every shadow contained a
lurking foe; and where every inch of soil was drenched with blood.

Thus to an unknown and unoccupied border-land between the Indians of the
North and those to the South, Virginia obtained, from one of its alleged
possessors, a nominal hold. Could she maintain it? The world asked the
question and awaited the answer, wonderingly.

The principal reason why Virginia was successful was because her
inhabitants were an agricultural people like their ancestors before them
in England. Being an agricultural people they had expanded further,
geographically, than the inhabitants of any of the other colonies. As
early as 1740, cabins were being built in Bedford County, Virginia, over
one hundred and fifty miles from the seaboard. There were settlements on
the New River, a branch of the Great Kanawha, before the French and
Indian war. Fort Loudoun, over the border, was erected in 1756, and
Forts Long Island and Chissel in 1758. The Wyoming massacre in New York
State in the Revolutionary War occurred on what was then the frontier,
though Wyoming was less than a hundred miles from New York City. And,
fortunately, this agricultural people was located in the most favorable
place along the Atlantic for expansion, for a reason already mentioned.
Back of New York and Pennsylvania roamed the Iroquois, Delawares,
Shawanese, and other Indian nations. Back of Virginia, whose fine rivers
rose in the mountains, lay a comparatively uninhabited country; for, the
moment the Indians became allied with either of the encroaching European
powers, they ceased contending together in the border-land behind
Virginia. It was not until Virginians began to occupy it that it became
anew a "dark and bloody ground." Virginia knew less of Indian warfare
than some of the neighboring colonies until the era of her expansion
when her sturdy people began occupying the land obtained at the Treaty
of Fort Stanwix.

The expansion of Virginia was greatly facilitated by the geographical
position of the mountains along her western frontier. While the
mountains of western New York and Pennsylvania obstructed expansion, in
Virginia the mountain ranges facilitated it. Further north they trended
directly north and south and even the rivers could find a passage-way
only by following the most tortuous courses. True, the Hudson and Mohawk
valleys offered a clear course to the great highland across to the
Niagara River, but it was not until very late in the eighteenth century
that the path across this watershed was open to white men. The two
routes through Pennsylvania crossed the mountains horizontally and
almost feared to follow the waterways. Braddock's Road crossed the
waters of one stream three times at right angles in the space of eighty
miles and did not follow it one hundred yards altogether. In Virginia
the mountain ranges trend southwesterly, with the rivers between them,
offering a practicable though roundabout route westward.

But there was another thing Virginia possessed in addition to an
agricultural people--an uninhabited territory west of her and some plain
courses into it. She had among her citizens some daring, far-sighted,
energetic men who might easily be called the first promoters of America.
They were moneyed men who sought honestly to make money; but they were
also men of chivalry and intense patriotism--Virginians of Virginians.
They thought of their pockets, but they also thought of their colony
and their king; the standing of the Old Dominion was very dear to them:
its growth in commercial as well as geographical dimensions. They
desired to be thought well of at home; they desired that Virginia should
be thought the best of all America.

Of these men the Washingtons were the most prominent, and George
Washington was a marvelously inspired leader. As early as 1749
Virginians secured a grant of land south of the Ohio and directly west
of old Virginia. The enterprise amounted to nothing save by
precipitating the contest between England and France for the West. The
example of the younger Washington in fighting for the possession of the
West, in encouraging the disheartened people of the frontier in the dark
days of defeat, in aiding in the final victory, in investing heavily in
western land (for he, it is said, died the richest man in America, and
half his wealth lay west of the Alleghenies), in encouraging the
building of the Potomac Canal, in impressing upon the people the
commercial value of exploiting the entire West from Lake Huron to
Cumberland Gap, affords perhaps the most remarkable instance in our
whole national history of one man inspiring a people to greater things.
A place and a rough way thither was ready for expanding Virginia--and
such sons as Washington gave the inspiration.

Through the great "trough" between the Allegheny and Blue Ridge ranges
passes the pioneer route to which we of the central West owe as much as
to any thoroughfare in America--that rough, long, roundabout road which,
coming down from Lancaster and Yorktown, crossed the Potomac at Wadkin's
Ferry, and passed up the Shenandoah valley by Martinsburg, Winchester
and Staunton; and on to the headwaters of the New River, where it was
joined by the thoroughfare through central Virginia from Richmond. Here,
near the meeting of these famous old-time Virginia thoroughfares, stood
Fort Chissel, erected in 1758 and situated two hundred miles east of
Cumberland Gap. Beyond Fort Chissel ran the Indian trail toward the Gap
and, within fifty miles of the Gap, stood Fort Watauga on a branch of
the Holston. This was the most westerly fort at the time of the Stanwix
treaty, and about the rude fort was springing up the Watauga settlement.
Other earlier settlements were made at Draper's Meadows and at Inglis
Ferry on New River by families bearing those names. For more than a
century the population of Virginia and North Carolina had been slowly
sifting up the river valleys toward the West and by the time the king's
proclamation was issued many cabins were already erected beyond the
headwaters of streams which fell "into the Atlantic Ocean from the West
or Northwest." Even the faithful Hillsborough seems to have recognized
this since his boundary line passed through Chiswell's Mine on the Great
Kanawha and the mouth of that river--much further west than a strict
interpretation of the proclamation would allow.

This vanguard which was moving westward was led by explorers and
hunters. Of two of the former, mention will be particularly made. The
parties of hunters who now began to press beyond the furthest
settlements, while they subsisted on game, were also real explorers of
the West and helped to set in motion and give zest to the great
immigration which followed the signing of the Stanwix treaty. It was
only one year after the Stanwix treaty when Daniel Boone came up from
his home on the Yadkin in North Carolina and led a company of men
through the Gap into the land whose hero and idol he was ever to be.
About the same time John Finley and party were trapping on the forbidden
rivers, and Colonel James Knox and company of nine hunted on the New,
Clinch, and Holston Rivers, and reaching even to the lower Cumberland in
1769-70. These parties of men found that a paradise for the husbandman
was to be speedily revealed to the world at the foothills of the
Cumberland and Pine mountains on the great plain falling away westward
to the Mississippi. At first, only the most vague description of the
rich meadows of the West reached the Virginian settlements, but, meager
as they were, they started a tide of immigration quite unparalleled in
American history. One of these descriptions is preserved for us in the
autobiography of Daniel Boone, and, though couched in language with
which he was probably less familiar than his amanuensis, still is not
unlike the stories told in border cabins to eager listening frontiersmen
who were soon on their rough way to this El Dorado beyond the horrid
ranges of the Cumberlands:

"We found everywhere abundance of wild beasts of all sorts, through this
vast forest. The buffalo were more frequent than I have seen cattle in
the settlements, browsing on the leaves of the cane, or cropping the
herbage on those extensive plains, fearless, because ignorant of the
violence of man.... Nature was here a series of wonders and a fund of
delight. Here she displayed her ingenuity and industry in a variety of
flowers and fruits, beautifully colored, elegantly shaped and charmingly
flavored; and we were diverted with innumerable animals presenting
themselves perpetually to our view.... Just at the close of day the
gentle gales retired and left the place to the disposal of a profound
calm. Not a breeze shook the most tremulous leaf. I had gained the
summit of a commanding ridge, and, looking around with astonishing
delight, beheld the ample plains, the beauteous tracts below: On the
other hand had I surveyed the famous Ohio river, that rolled in silent
dignity, marking the western boundary of Kentucky with inconceivable
grandeur. At a vast distance I beheld the mountains lift their venerable
brows, and penetrate the clouds."

Inspired by such descriptions as these, there came in the wake of the
hunter-explorers crowds of immigrants. Very many came even bringing
their families, for the novelty of the adventure and because there was
nothing to keep them where they had had but a tomahawk claim on the
border. There were thousands who entered the West and became valuable
citizens (considering the work to be done) who would best be described
as gypsies. For a larger part of the way across the continent this
peculiar class of people moved westward between the advanced explorers
and the swarm of genuine "settlers" whose feet, even at this time, were
making the middle of our continent tremble. For instance, very many of
the first settlers in the territory near the Mississippi hailed from a
portion of the land between their home there and the Allegheny
mountains, just as many of the first settlers between the Ohio and Lake
Erie hailed from Virginia's land between the Ohio and Tennessee. The
phrase "following the immigration" was a common one and covered this
class of pioneers who moved away from a given district of land when it
began to fill with settlers. There has appeared a disposition in some
quarters to attempt to minimize the value of the hosts of so-called
"squatters" and "tomahawk claimers" who first moved into the West. Our
pioneer literature is full of discreditable allusions, made by the
second tide of pioneers who came West, concerning the scattered ranks of
first comers, their moral character, their ways of thought and living.
The later blueblood stock had not a little to say concerning the
pioneers of Western Virginia and Kentucky flavored with the same spice
that Dickens employed when, a little later, he jotted down his "American
Notes." It seems as though it were reasonable to remember what these
first comers did rather than the picture of what they were. But for them
there could never have been a better West. Who composed the armies of
McIntosh, Brodhead, Crawford, Harmar, St. Clair, and Wayne but these
rough, wild-looking men who first entered the West? What is now western
Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky gave practically all the
troops which conquered the land between the Ohio River and the Great
Lakes. And all of them, save the few who could raise money to buy some
of it, retired again to their slovenly "claims" south of the Ohio--and a
flood-tide of newcomers came after them to bring a new era they could
never have brought, and, incidentally, leave to posterity repulsive
pictures of them. It hath been said: "Instead of the thorn shall come up
the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree;
and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that
shall not be cut off." The West was a land of brier and thorn, and men
as rough as briers and thorns were needed to strike the first swift hard
blows. The squatter in the West played an important part and should not
be remembered solely by the pictures drawn of his filth, lawlessness,
and laziness. The Cleaveland of 1798 was a paradise beside the Cleveland
of 1810. Was it not Caleb Atwater who said that "not one young man,
whose family was rich, and of very high standing in the Eastern States,
has succeeded in Ohio?" A little later in this narrative we shall read
of one "Abraham hanks" who went, an unknown pioneer, with Daniel Boone
through Cumberland Gap at the very van of all the western immigration!
Atwater was not referring to his grandson--the immortal son of Nancy
Hanks. Theodore Roosevelt in the following words has emphasized the debt
our country owes to this class of early citizens: "Nevertheless this
very ferocity was not only inevitable, but it was in a certain sense
proper; or at least, even if many of its manifestations were blamable,
the spirit that lay behind them was right. The backwoodsmen were no
sentimentalists; they were grim, hard, matter-of-fact men, engaged all
their lives long in an unending struggle with hostile forces, both
human and natural; men who in this struggle had acquired many unamiable
qualities, but who had learned likewise to appreciate at their full
value the inestimable virtues of courage and common-sense. The crisis
[Revolution] demanded that they should be both strong and good; but,
above all things, it demanded that they should be strong. Weakness would
have ruined them. It was needful that justice should stand before mercy;
and they could no longer have held their homes, had they not put down
their foes, of every kind with an iron hand."

With these uncouth border families moved another class of men known as
land speculators. The schemes of these fortune hunters and of the many
great companies of which they were the representatives would fill a
moderate volume and can only be hinted at here. As we have noted, a
company was organized very early to speculate in western lands, called
the Ohio Company. It received from the king of England a grant of land
between the Monongahela and Great Kanawha Rivers, but failed to fulfil
the required conditions and the Charter reverted to the Crown. From that
day to the breaking out of the Revolutionary War numerous land companies
secured by one means or another a claim to certain lands and many sought
such claims but never secured them. It will be necessary to refer to one
of these companies later in the course of our narrative.

Near the front in this race for the rich meadows between the Ohio and
Tennessee were bounty-land claimants. One of Virginia's most effective
pleas for the great territory which had come into her possession was
that she might reward her soldiers of the French and Indian wars. While
as a people she had known less of Indian warfare than some of the
colonies, Virginia had been liberal in sending troops northward to
defend the frontier. And these Virginians had made a name for themselves
at Braddock's defeat and elsewhere. Washington was always insistent that
the claims of these old veterans of the bloody border war be redeemed in
good lands, and it must be remembered ever with pride that as late as
1770, only six years before he became commander-in-chief of the armies
of the United States at Cambridge, and but two years after the signing
of the Stanwix treaty, he made the difficult journey to the Ohio River
and down that river in a canoe to Virginia's new empire on the Great
Kanawha, where surveys of bounty lands for his heroes of Fort Necessity
were first made. Additional surveys were soon made along the Ohio and
Licking Rivers.

Explorers, hunters, squatters, speculators, and bounty-land
claimants--this was the heterogeneous population that was surging
westward to the land of which Boone wrote. But not all came down the old
thoroughfare between the Allegheny and Blue Ridge Mountains and through
Cumberland Gap. Many followed northward the rough trails which descended
the New and Monongahela Rivers, while many went northwesterly over
Braddock's overgrown twelve-foot road or along the winding narrow track
of Forbes's Road through the Pennsylvania Glades to the little frontier
fortress, Fort Pitt. From the time Bouquet relieved this beleaguered
garrison until the Stanwix treaty, Pittsburg, as the town was now
known, had been growing. One year after that treaty (1769) the manor of
Pittsburg was surveyed, the survey embracing five thousand seven hundred
and sixty-six acres. Upon the signing of the Stanwix treaty, Pittsburg
became an important point and was claimed by both Pennsylvania and
Virginia. About it sprang up villages and from it down the Ohio and up
the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers settlements spread. What was
loosely known as the "Monongahela Country"--the territory between the
Monongahela and Ohio Rivers--became quite populous.

Here, high up along the Ohio River, the Virginians learned how to fight
the red man, if they had never known before. The decade succeeding
Pontiac's war, though nominally a peaceful one, was, nevertheless, one
long and bitter duel between the Indians north of the Ohio and the
Virginians who were coming "in shoals" to its southern bank. It has been
estimated that the total loss of life within that decade was as great as
the total loss in the open war--Dunmore's War--which soon broke out and
which momentarily threatened the extinction of Virginia's great
colonial movement into the southern half of this black forest of the
West.

We have refrained from using the name Kentucky long enough, perhaps, to
accomplish the purpose of impressing upon the reader's mind the part
Virginia and the Virginians played in the creation of the earliest
settlement in the West, first known as the county, then the state, of
Kentucky. As Professor Shaler has said: "She owes to Virginia the most
of the people she received during the half century when her society was
taking shape: her institutions, be they good or evil, her ideals of
life, her place in the nation's history, are all as immediately derived
from her great Mother Virginia as are an individual man's from the
mother who bore him."

The name Kentucky, Kentuckgin, Kantucky, Kentucke, Caintuck, as it was
variously spelled, may have been derived from an Iroquois word
_Ken-ta-kee_, which means "among the meadows." When, in the olden days,
only the long, painted canoes of the Iroquois could be moored in safety
in the shades of the woodland meadows south of the Oyo, the name
Ken-ta-kee was first heard--a name which has come down to us so pregnant
with pride and power. The Catawba River, which gained its name, perhaps,
from the famous war-path which followed it toward the land of the
Catawbas in the south, was first known as the Louisa River (named by
Walker in honor of the wife of the "Bloody Duke" of Cumberland), and
afterwards as the Kentucky River.

After the treaty at the close of Dunmore's War, Virginia had two
quit-claim deeds to her western empire: one from the Iroquois, who
boasted their possession of it, and one from the Shawanese, who had
disputed the settlement. There was yet another claimant to deal with,
the Cherokees of the South. In the year following the battle of Point
Pleasant (1774) a land company headed by Colonel Richard Henderson
purchased from the Cherokees the land between the Ohio, Kentucky, and
Cumberland Rivers. This purchase was achieved at Fort Watauga through
the agency of Daniel Boone. This private purchase from the Indians was
afterward annulled by both Virginia and North Carolina, but so far as
the Indian claims to Kentucky were concerned it had passed into the
possession of the white man. Every inch of soil had been fairly obtained
from each and every claimant who had made it a "dark and bloody ground"
through their battles for it, since the earliest period of recorded
history. But at the time of the Cherokee purchase, an old Indian chief
said to Boone: "Brother, we have given you a fine land, but I believe
you will have much trouble in settling it." Perhaps the Cherokees knew
what Shawanese quit-claim deeds were worth!

After making this purchase for Colonel Henderson, Boone engaged to mark
out a road through Cumberland Gap to the center of the newly acquired
territory. Following the old trail through the Gap, Boone's Road ended
at a new settlement at the mouth of Otter Creek on the Kentucky River
named Boonesborough, in his honor. Fort Boonesborough was completed July
14, 1775. Colonel Logan and party came westward through the Gap at the
same time but diverged from Boone's Road on Rockcastle Creek, and
opened the more important branch of the road toward Louisville by way of
Crab Orchard and Danville, and erected Fort Logan one mile west of
Standford, in what is now Lincoln County, Kentucky. Harrod's, Logan's,
and Boone's forts were the important early "stations" in the West. To
them the thousands wended their tedious way over the "Wilderness Road,"
as both branches (Logan's and Boone's) were fitly called, or down the
Ohio from Pittsburg. And along these lines of western movement cabins
and clearings made their rapid appearance despite the era of bloodshed
which began almost simultaneously with the opening of the Revolutionary
War in the East.


Such were the pilgrims of the West. It is interesting to note that these
leaders of civilization in the West were true Americans--American born
and American bred. It is remarkable that the discoverers of the American
central West were either French or American. For the work of exploring
this _hinterland_, England scarcely furnished a man; she can write no
names opposite those of Brulé, Cartier, Champlain, Du Lhuth, Hennepin,
Joliet, Marquette, and La Salle. Nearly all that England knew of the
interior she learned from the French. Her great explorers were maritime
explorers and her conquest of New France was effected by water. But
while the West could not have for its first colonists the counterpart of
the hardy, irresistible race who first came to the Atlantic seaboard, it
did have the next best thing--the direct descendants of them. It was a
race of Americanized Britons who pressed from Virginia into the West.
Hardly a name among them but was pure Norman or Saxon. Of the
twenty-five members of the Political Club at Danville, Kentucky, which
discussed with ability the Federal Constitution, all but two were
descendants of colonists from Great Britain and Ireland. Of forty-five
members of the convention which framed Kentucky's first constitution,
only three could claim European ancestry. Of the seven hundred members
of the Filson Club, the representative historical society of Kentucky
today, there are not more than twenty who are not either English,
Scotch, Welsh, or Irish. The blood of the mother country flowed in purer
strain in no portion of the continent at the outbreak of the
Revolutionary War than in the Virginian settlement of Kentucky. That the
blood was true to its fighting traditions is proved by the Revolutionary
pension rolls. In 1840 there were nine hundred Revolutionary soldiers
receiving pensions in Kentucky. This race gave to the West its real
heroes--the Gists, Walkers, Boones, Clarks, Todds, Shelbys, Kentons,
Logans, Lewises, Crawfords, Gibsons, and St. Clairs. In frontier cabins
they were bred to a free life in a free land--worthy successors to
Washington and his school, worthy men to subdue and rule the empire of
which they began the conquest before the outbreak of the Revolutionary
War. In the form of these sturdy colonizers the American republic
stretched its arm across the Appalachian mountain system and took in its
grasp the richest river valley in the world at the end of Boone's
Wilderness Road. That arm was never withdrawn, that grasp never
relinquished. The leaven of old Virginia leavened the whole lump.


Thus may be outlined briefly the era of expansion in which Boone's Road
played an all-important part. In the succeeding chapters the phases of
this historic movement are reviewed as the meager data now obtainable
can permit.




CHAPTER II

THE FIRST EXPLORERS


The first real explorations of the great territory secured by Virginia
at the Treaty of Fort Stanwix were made by Dr. Thomas Walker, who later
so skilfully managed Virginia's part of that treaty, and Christopher
Gist, in the early years of the second half of the eighteenth century,
1750 and 1751.

The brief journals[1] written by these men are the sources of our first
information concerning the vast territory west of the Appalachian
mountain system--the eastern half of the Mississippi basin south of the
Ohio River. They are meager records of hard day's pilgrimages, an
outline of the routes pursued, and a description of the lands which were
traversed. Both were explorers for two newly-formed land companies.
Walker represented the Loyal Land Company of London, and Gist was the
representative of the Ohio Company. The company for which Walker acted
had secured a grant of eight hundred thousand acres in the territory now
embraced in Kentucky north of 36° 30´. The Ohio Company had a grant of
five hundred thousand acres between the Kanawha and Monongahela Rivers.
These men were sent to search out favorable lands and report on the
giants and grapes. They found both.

Little suggestion of the romance and daring of these historic journeys
can be found in either of the journals of them; they make slight books.
But volumes can be written on what can be read by the most careless
reader between their few lines. The long climbing over the almost
pathless mountains, the nights spent in discomfort, the countless
trials, fears, dangers of which they knew so much and told so
little--all this should make a story if it never has, that could not by
any means find an uninterested reader. No youth's history is of moment
until we know the man and know that he is a man among men. Our nation is
still a boy. Only with the passing of the years will its boyhood be
studied and known as it should be known; when that time comes, the brief
stories of such men as Walker and Gist will appear of priceless value.

"Having, on the 12th of December last, been employed for a certain
consideration to go to the Westward in order to discover a proper Place
for a Settlement, I left my house on the Sixth day of March, at 10
o'clock, 1749-50, in Company with Ambrose Powell, William Tomlinson,
Colby Chew, Henry Lawless & John Hughs. Each man had a Horse and we had
two to carry the Baggage. I lodged this night at Col. Joshua Fry's, in
Albemarle, which County includes the Chief of the head Branches of James
River on the East side of the Blue Ridge." Thus begins Dr. Walker's
journal. At this time England and her colonies were dating by the old
calendar, each new year beginning on the twenty-fifth of March.
Accordingly they started nineteen days before the beginning of the year
1750.

It was a brave little company of adventurous men. Walker had attended
William and Mary College, and then had joined the ranks of that
distinguished army of representative Virginians who, with saddle-bags
and surveying instruments, proved to be the vanguard of the army which
was to achieve the real conquest of the West. His home was Castle Hill,
near Charlottesville, Albemarle County, Virginia, where his companions
had rendezvoused for the present expedition and from which point they
began their historic journey. Powell was of the best Virginian stock,
and has left his name to one of the great valleys through which the
highway to the West ran. His son became a Revolutionary officer and his
great-grandson was General A. P. Hill, the famous Confederate leader.
Chew was from Orange County, Virginia, and belonged to the Maryland
branch of the Chew family. Two Presidents of the United States, Madison
and Taylor, could claim him as a relative. Seven years later he served
in Washington's regiment in Forbes's expedition against Fort Duquesne,
and was killed in Grant's wild attack on that fort. As the journal
states, this company spent the first night out with Colonel Joshua Fry.
Fry too was one of them in spirit, though he did not accompany them
westward. He was a graduate of Oxford University, joint author with
Jefferson of Fry and Jefferson's celebrated Map of Virginia, and a
commissioner for the crown in establishing the boundary line between
North Carolina and Virginia. He was killed by being thrown from his
horse while taking command of Washington's expedition against Fort
Duquesne, four years later. These statistics show plainly that the best
brain and blood of Virginia was foremost in attempting to realize
Virginia's dream of conquest and expansion.

But it was a time for brave men to show themselves. Ambitious Virginia
had been slow to claim the West, where even at this early date Frenchmen
had gone so far into the wilderness. Céloron, bold emissary of the
humpbacked Canadian Governor Gallissonière, was now burying leaden
plates at the mouths of the rivers which emptied into the Ohio, as a
sign of French possession of the West. One of these was placed at the
mouth of the Great Kanawha "at the mouth of the river Chinodahihetha,
this 18th day of August," claiming for the Bourbon crown the entire
territory in which the grant of land to the Ohio Company was located.
There was not a moment to lose if the West was to be saved to England. A
settlement must be made quickly, and Walker and his band pushed on
immediately to find a "proper Place for a Settlement."

But all this, seemingly, is neither here nor there--so far as Walker's
Journal is concerned. There is not one mention of the political crisis
then at hand; instead of French claims, Walker deals with tired horses
or broken-legged dogs, and where one might suppose he would mention
national boundary lines he tells only of cutting names on trees. And at
the end, where the reader might look for a summary statement of the
results of his tour he finds this: "I got home about noon. We killed in
the Journey 13 Buffaloes, 8 Elks, 53 Bears, 20 Deer, 4 Wild Geese, about
150 Turkeys, besides small game. We might have killed three times as
much meat, if we had wanted it." Yet, so far as human interest is
concerned, the record is exceptionally entertaining, and to a student of
the great thoroughfare from Virginia to Kentucky it is full of meaning;
because of its many references to the difficulties of traveling at that
early date, and to the varied experiences of explorers on the earliest
thoroughfares westward. It is this story of experience in traveling west
in 1750 that makes Walker's Journal of interest in the present study.

On the day after the party left Colonel Fry's, "We set off about 8,"
writes Dr. Walker, "but the day proving wet, we only went to Thomas
Joplin's on Rockfish. This is a pretty River, which might at a small
expense be made fit for transporting Tobacco; but it has lately been
stopped by a Mill Dam near the Mouth to the prejudice of the upper
inhabitants who would at their own expense clear and make it navigable,
were they permitted." Virginia's great industry evidently flourished
this far from tidewater even at this early date, though handicapped by
these dams which were erected by the "Averice of Millers," on which Dr.
Walker comments again in his next day's record. The record for Sunday,
the eleventh, is appropriately brief: "11th. The Sabbath." In only one
or two instances did the party travel on Sunday, and then the journey
was occasioned by necessity. On the twelfth the party crossed the Upper
James River above the mouth of the Rivanna, and lodged with one Thomas
Hunt.

"13th. We went early to William Calloway's and supplied ourselves with
Rum, Thread, and other necessaries & from thence took the main Waggon
Road leading to Wood's or the New River. It is not well clear'd or
beaten yet, but will be a very good one with proper management." Wood's
River--or New River, as we know it today--was discovered in 1671 by
Colonel Abraham Wood, who explored along the line which later became the
boundary line between North Carolina and Virginia. He crossed the
Alleghenies through "Wood's Gap" (now Flower Gap) and, going down Little
River, found New River not far from Inglis Ferry, where Walker's party
crossed three days later. This mention of the road Walker traversed is
his first reference to the great road westward toward Cumberland Gap; he
remarks its roughness, but before he returned to Virginia he learned new
lessons on rough roads. "This night we lodged in Adam Beards low
grounds. Beard is an ignorant, impudent, brutish fellow, and would have
taken us up, had it not been for a reason, easily suggested." When thus
brought in contrast with the hospitality usually tendered Walker's
party, the deportment of this churlish mountaineer is conspicuous.
Travelers on these first highways were ever in need--if for nothing more
than a camping-place. The people who settled beside the frontier roads
were trained by bitter experience to a generous hospitality. This
hospitality was particularly marked, throughout the colonies, among
those who could afford it, especially on the frontiers; and here it was
often bestowed upon travelers when it could be ill-afforded. The modern
hotel has in a large measure relieved the general public from the burden
of continual and promiscuous hospitality, and it has been found that
where hotels are least known this prime requisite of an expanding
civilization may still be found. On the frontier, men were dependent on
those who lived beside the road, not only in time of accident and
sickness, but at all times--for little food and forage could be carried.
At times travelers nearly perished when once beyond the frontier line.
Walker's party, though they killed the large amount of game mentioned,
were once compelled to kill and eat one of their dogs. Captain Estill,
who lost his life in Kentucky in the engagement which bears his name, is
said to have done a great service for emigrants from Virginia by killing
game and leaving the meat beside the road, in order to "pass on and
notify incoming trains where they might find a supply of meat."

Instances of vile treatment of travelers are not often cited, but the
few that exist are the exceptions that prove the rule of generosity
which was common to the time.

Leaving Beard's, Walker and his men went, on the fourteenth, to Nicholas
Welch's, "where," the Doctor writes, "we bought corn for our horses, and
had some Victuals dress'd for Breakfast." From here they climbed the
Blue Ridge through Buford's Gap, in Bedford County, through which the
Norfolk and Western Railroad now passes. "The Ascent and Descent is so
easie," writes Walker, "that a Stranger would not know when he crossed
the Ridge." On the day after, they reached "the great Lick" near the
present city of Roanoke, and continued up the trail on the following day
to near the historic Inglis Ferry, not far from the present village of
Blacksburg, Montgomery County, Virginia.

From this on, Walker's route is not of importance to our study, as he
missed the great trail which would have taken him to the pleasant
meadows of Kentucky--though he struck it again at Cumberland Gap but did
not follow it--and wandered over a circuitous route thus outlined by
Daniel Bryan: "They started from low down in Virginia, traveled
westwardly across Alleghany Mountains to Chissel's Lead Mine, on New
River; thence into the Holston Valley, thence over Walden's Ridge and
Powell's Mountain into Powell's Valley.... They then continued down the
valley, leaving Cumberland Mountain a small distance on their right
hand, until they came to Cumberland Gap.... At the foot of this mountain
they fell into an Indian path leading from the Cherokee towns on
Tennessee River to the Shawnee Indian towns on the Ohio, which path they
followed down Yellow Creek to the old ford of Cumberland River....
Thence they went on the path down the river to the Flat Lick, eight
miles; here they left the river, continued on the path, turning more
north, crossing some of the head branches of the Kentucky River over a
poor and hilly country, until they concluded there was no good country
in the West. They then took an easterly course over the worst mountains
and laurel thickets in the world.... They crossed the Laurel or
Cumberland Mountain and fell into the Green brier country, almost
starved to death ... and reached home with life only to pay for all
their trouble and suffering."

Regretting that this opinion of the final value of Walker's journey
cannot be gainsaid, it is yet of interest to follow his footsteps and
learn what were some of the experiences of such early explorers as
these.

On the twenty-sixth they "left the Inhabitans," as Dr. Walker called the
line of civilization, and were at last within the wild land where no
settlers had yet come. On the night of the twenty-ninth the "Dogs were
very uneasie," and the next day, on Reedy Creek, a branch of the South
Fork of the Holston, the tracks of a party of Indians were discovered,
which explained the restlessness of the dogs. It is probably little
realized in this day how valuable dogs were to explorers and immigrants.
They were not only of service in giving warning of the approach of
strangers, but were well-nigh indispensable in securing game and in
searching for lost horses. Dr. Walker's love for dogs is a tradition in
the family, and his care of them on this journey is typical of the
gentleman and the wise frontiersman. At the junction of Reedy Creek and
the Holston--an historic spot in Tennessee--Walker found a gigantic elm
tree, which measured twenty-five feet in circumference at a distance of
three feet from the ground. Pioneers and explorers considered the study
of trees a fine art. By this means they always judged the quality of the
soil, and knew at a glance by the growth that stood on it the character
of any piece of land. The diaries of all that old school of western
adventurers contain frequent mention of trees which were an almost
infallible criterion of the soil beneath. Washington had keen eyes for
trees--as for everything else--as illustrated in the journal of his trip
down the Ohio River in 1770. On the fourth of November he found a
sycamore on the Great Kanawha, in comparison with which this first elm
of Walker's was insignificant. It measured, three feet from the ground,
forty-five feet in circumference, and near by stood another measuring
thirty-one feet around. Upon hearing about this larger tree, some one
remarked that Washington might have told the truth about the cherry tree
but he told a "whopper" about the sycamore. But it was not guess-work,
for the record states clearly that the girth of the larger tree lacked
two inches of being the complete forty-five feet. Trees along the Ohio
grew to an immense size; an old Ohio River pilot affirms that in his
boyhood a burned trunk of a sycamore stood on his father's farm on the
Little Muskingum, into which he has frequently driven a horse, turned it
about, and come out again. General Harmar found on the Ohio a
button-wood tree forty-two feet in circumference, which held forty men
within its trunk.

On the seventh of April Dr. Walker writes: "It snowed most of the day.
In the Evening our dogs caught a large He Bear, which before we could
come up to shoot him had wounded a dog of mine, so that he could not
Travel, and we carried him on Horseback, till he recovered." On the
thirteenth the party reached "Cave Gap," which Walker named Cumberland
Gap in honor of the "bloody Duke," the hero of Culloden. "Just at the
foot of the Hill is a Laurel Thicket.... On the South side is a plain
Indian Road. On the top of the Ridge are Laurel Trees marked with
crosses, others Blazed and several Figures on them.... This Gap may be
seen at a considerable distance, and there is no other, that I know of,
except one about two miles to the North of it, which does not appear to
be so low as the other. The Mountain on the North Side of the Gap is
very Steep and Rocky, but on the South side it is not So. We called it
Steep Ridge."

The party crossed the Cumberland River about four miles below the
present village of Barbourville, Knox County, Kentucky, on the
twenty-third of April. The river was named by Walker at this time. From
this spot Walker, with two companions chosen by lot--Powell and
Chew--went on a tour of exploration alone, leaving the others "to
provide and salt some Bear, build an house, and plant some Peach Stones
and Corn."

Walker and his two companions floundered about the neighboring region
for five days, not getting out of the mountainous country and not
finding any good land. They crossed the Cumberland again, on the third
day out, about twenty miles below the first crossing-place, and then
returned up the river to the main party and found that the work he had
ordered to be done was completed. "The People I had left had built an
House 12 by 8, clear'd and broke up some ground, & planted Corn, and
Peach Stones."

Thus was raised, beside the tumbling Cumberland, on the farm now owned
by George M. Faulkner four miles below Barbourville, Kentucky, the first
house now recorded as built by white men in the fine territory between
the Cumberland Mountains and the Ohio River, now the state of Kentucky.
It was not an "improver's cabin"--a log pen without roof--but a roofed
house, and instituted what the English Loyal Land Company could claim to
be a "settlement" in the territory which they had been granted. This was
completed by the planting of corn and peach trees. The formality of this
"settlement" is evinced by the fact that, two days later, the entire
party moved on for further exploration, never again to return to their
house or to reap their crops. It was twenty years before a house was
erected in Kentucky for the permanent dwelling.

From this on, Dr. Walker's journal is a long story of accidents and
disappointments. One horse became lame, and "another had been bit in the
Nose by a Snake." "I rub'd the wounds with Bear's oil, and gave him a
drench of the same and another of the decoction of Rattle Snake root
some time after." On the same day "Colby Chew and his Horse fell down
the Bank. I Bled and gave him Volatile drops, & he soon recovered." On
the first of May they reached Powell's River. This was named from
Ambrose Powell. During the journey Dr. Walker gave the name of each of
his companions to rivers he discovered; none were given his name, though
a mountain range to the north of Fort Chiswell still bears the name of
Walker's Mountain. On Powell's River the party this day again struck the
Indian path which later became the great highway to Kentucky. Again he
was on the route that would have taken him to the famous meadows below
the foothills of the mountains, and again he left it as he did when he
chose to explore on the south side of Cumberland Mountain, instead of
crossing at Pineville and following the trail northward. He did not
cross Rockcastle River. J. Stoddard Johnson says: "This was the farthest
western point reached by Doctor Walker. He did not cross the main
Rockcastle River, and, therefore, was never on the waters of Salt or
Green rivers, as claimed by some. A day or two's travel to the west or
northwest would have brought him to the fertile lands of Lincoln or
Madison County, his description of which would have left no doubt of his
having passed the watershed between the Rockcastle, the Salt, and the
rivers to the westward."[2]

Shoes formed an important item in the catalogue of necessaries for the
early traveler's outfit on the first traveled ways in America. Already
Walker's party, though they traveled largely by horse, had worn out the
shoes with which they started, and on the eleventh of May under one of
the great cliffs near Rockcastle River they set to work to make
themselves new shoes out of elkskin. "When our Elk's Skin was prepared,"
writes Dr. Walker on the fourteenth, "we had lost every Awl that we
brought out, and I made one with the Shank of an old Fishing hook, the
other People made two of Horse Shoe Nails, and with these we made our
Shoes and Moccosons."

On the twenty-third the party was on the Kentucky River, where Walker
found a sycamore which measured forty feet in circumference--almost, it
will be seen, the size of the tree Washington found on the Great
Kanawha--upon which he marked his initials, "T. W." On the day after, he
found another sycamore thirty feet in circumference. These trees, it
would naturally be inferred, marked the location of fertile soil. On the
twenty-sixth the "Dogs roused a large Buck Elk, which we followed down
to a Creek. He killed Ambrose Powell's Dog in the Chase, and we named
the Run Tumbler's Creek, the Dog being of that Name."

"31st. We crossed 2 Mountains and camped just by a Wolf's Den. They were
very impudent and after they had twice been shot at, they kept howling
about the Camp. It rained till Noon this day."

"June ye 1st. We found the Wolf's Den and caught 4 of the young ones."
It was very common for frontiersmen to invade the dens of wolves without
any opposition on the part of the old wolves. Wolf cubs have often been
pulled away from their mothers, who would only snarl and show their
teeth. Bears, on the other hand, would fight to the death any invader of
their dens. Notions which commonly prevail today, about the dangers in
the primeval forests of America from wild animals, undergo a great
change after a careful reading of pioneer literature.

On the fourth of June "a very black Cloud appearing, we turn'd out our
Horses, got tent Poles up, and were just stretching a Tent, when it
began to rain and hail, and was succeeded by a violent Wind which Blew
down our Tent & a great many Trees about it, several large ones within
30 yds. of the Tent. We all left the place in confusion and ran
different ways for shelter. After the Storm was over, we met at the
Tent, and found all safe."

On the fourteenth the party had gone east as far as the dividing ridge
between the two forks of the Big Sandy; but within a few days the horses
were spent, and the whole party floundered onward afoot. On the
twentieth they reached Flat-top Mountain, Raleigh County, West Virginia.
This day Dr. Walker's horse was bitten by a snake; "... having no
Bear's Oil," he wrote, "I rub'd the place with a piece of fat meat,
which had the desired effect."

Passing the present site of Hinton, West Virginia, the party followed
about the present line of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway. They crossed
the Allegheny divide July 8, and Hot Springs the ninth. They found "Six
Invalides there. The Spring Water is very Clear & warmer than new Milk,
and there is a spring of cold Water within 20 feet of the Warm one. I
left one of my Company this day." They reached Augusta Court House
(Staunton, Virginia) on the eleventh, and Castle Hill on the sixteenth,
having been four months and seven days on the journey.

Walker's hard tour amounted to very little for the plain reason that he
never got west of the mountains. He found no good land and his report
was depressing.


It remained for another brave frontiersman to go further and bring back
the welcome news of large areas of splendid land in the Ohio Valley. In
1748 John Hanbury, London merchant; Thomas Lee, President of the
Council of Virginia; and a number of prominent Virginians formed the
Ohio Company, elsewhere mentioned, and received a large grant of land in
the West. The grant was made March 18, 1749: two hundred thousand acres
between the Monongahela and Great Kanawha Rivers, and later three
hundred thousand acres, to be located on the waters of the lower Ohio.
In 1750 this company employed Christopher Gist, a hardy, well-trained
frontiersman who lived on the Yadkin in North Carolina, to explore the
Ohio Valley and make a report upon the land there found. For his arduous
service he was to receive one hundred and fifty pounds sterling "and
such further handsome allowance as his service should deserve." His
instructions read as follows:

"You are to go out as soon as possible to the Westward of the great
Mountains, and carry with you such a Number of Men as You think
necessary, in Order to Search out and discover the Lands upon the river
Ohio & other adjoining Branches of the Mississippi down as low as the
great Falls thereof: You are particularly to observe the Ways & Passes
thro all the Mountains you cross, & take an exact Account of the Soil,
Quality & Product of the Land, and the Wideness and Deepness of the
Rivers, & the several Falls belonging to them, together with the Courses
& Bearings of the Rivers & Mountains as near as you conveniently can:
You are also to observe what Nations of Indians inhabit there, their
Strength and Numbers, who they trade with, & in what Comodities they
deal.

"When you find a large quantity of good, level Land, such as you think
will suit the Company, You are to measure the Breadth of it, in three or
four different Places, & take the Courses of the River & Mountains on
which it binds in Order to judge the Quantity: You are to fix the
Beginning & Bounds in such a Manner that they may be easily found again
by your Description; the nearer in the Land lies the better, provided it
be good & level, but we had rather go quite down the Mississippi than
take mean broken Land. After finding a large Body of good level Land,
you are not to stop but proceed further, as low as the Falls of the
Ohio, that we may be informed of that Navigation; And You are to take an
exact Account of all the large Bodies of good level Land, in the same
Manner as above directed that the Company may the better judge when it
will be most convenient for them to take their Land.

"You are to note all the Bodies of good Land as you go along, tho there
is not a sufficient Quantity for the Company's Grant, but You need not
be so particular in the Mensuration of that, as in the larger Bodies of
Land.

"You are to draw as good a plan as you can of the Country You pass thro:
You are to take an exact and particular Journal of all Your Proceedings,
and make a true Report thereof to the Ohio Company."

Gist was the man for the business in hand. He came from an enterprising
family and was well educated. His father was one of the Commissioners
for laying off the city of Baltimore. "Little is known of his early
life, but the evidences he has left in his journals, his maps, plats of
surveys, and correspondence indicate that he enjoyed the advantages of
an education superior to that of many of his calling in those early
days. His signature and manuscript are characterized by the neatness and
uniformity of a copy plate, while his plats and surveys are models in
their mathematical exactness and precision of drawing. To this evidence
of scholarly order and professional skill he added the hardy qualities
of the pioneer and backwoodsman, capable of enduring the exposure of
long journeys in the most rigorous weather. In him were combined the
varied talents which made him at once an accomplished surveyor, an
energetic farmer who felled the forest and tilled the soil, a skilful
diplomat who understood the Indian character and was influential in
making treaties, a brave soldier, an upright man, trusted by the highest
civil and military authorities with implicit faith."[3]

The earlier portion of Gist's journey, which he began in October, 1750,
is not of importance in the present monograph. He reached the Ohio River
by way of the Juniata and Kiskiminitas Rivers. Crossing the Ohio he
worked his way westward on the Great Trail to the "Crossing Place of the
Muskingum" (Bolivar, Ohio), and from thence he traversed the Indian
trail to the country of the Shawanese and Miamis.

It was not until Tuesday, the twelfth of March, that Gist again crossed
the Ohio, and entered what is now the state of Kentucky. His first day's
experience was typical--in a land so well known for great things and
strong; for on the day after crossing at the Shawanese Shannoah Town, he
found two men who had "Two of the Teeth of a large Beast.... The Rib
Bones of the largest of these Beasts were eleven Feet long, and the
Skull Bone six Feet wide, across the Forehead, & the other Bones in
Proportion; and that there were several Teeth there, some of which he
called Horns, and said they were upwards of five Feet long, and as much
as a Man could well carry."

Gist was now in Kentucky--the land of which thousands were waiting to
hear, the home of the race that was to come and conquer and settle and
hold the West. Of it Gist came to know only a little, but this little
was the beginning of a revelation.

After crossing the Ohio, Gist journeyed over a hundred miles down the
southern bank of the river, and on March eighteenth crossed "the lower
Salt Lick Creek," the Licking River. Reports of Indians at the "Falls"
and "the footsteps of some Indians plain on the Ground" made him desist
from visiting that spot, but he took down descriptions of it. On the
nineteenth he turned southward into the interior. On the twentieth he
ascended Pilot Knob, near Clay City, Powell County, and writes of the
view from that height from which he saw, as John Finley wrote later,
"with pleasure the beautiful level of Kentucky."

With but a glimpse of the good lands of Kentucky, Gist, like Walker
before him, journeyed into the mountainous country to the southeast. For
a month he floundered around in the desolate laurel ridges where Walker
had spent so many distressing days the year before. On Red River Gist
crossed Walker's route and came on homeward between Walker's outward and
homeward courses. From Red River he went through Pound Gap and
eastward, down what is known as Gist's or Guesse's Fork of the Clinch in
Wise County, Virginia, and then upon Bluestone, a tributary of New
River. On the thirteenth of May he crossed Walker's route again at
Inglis Ferry, near Draper's Meadows. On the seventeenth he passed into
North Carolina through Flower or Wood's Gap toward his home on the
Yadkin. He reached home on the eighteenth and found that his family had
removed to Roanoke, thirty-five miles eastward, because of depredations
of the Indians during the winter.

Gist's journey was far more successful than Walker's. He found the fine
fertile valleys of the Muskingum, Scioto, and Miami Rivers north of the
Ohio, and he caught a glimpse of the beautiful meadows of Kentucky. He
singularly made a complete circle about the land between the Monongahela
and Kanawha Rivers, where the Ohio Company's grant of land was made. As
he did not approach it on any side it is probable that he knew that only
rough land lay there. Had it not been for the sudden breaking out of the
old French War, the Ohio Company would undoubtedly have settled on
lands in the Ohio Valley according to Gist's advice. Hostilities on the
frontier soon drove back the farther settlements, and rendered
activities in the land Gist had discovered out of the question, either
on the part of land companies or private individuals.




CHAPTER III

ANNALS OF THE ROAD


With the close of Pontiac's Rebellion and the passing away of the war
clouds which had hung so long over the West, ten thousand eyes turned
longingly across the Alleghenies and Blue Ridge. War with all its
horrors had yet brought something of good, for never before had the
belief that a splendidly fertile empire lay to the westward taken such a
hold upon the people of Virginia. Nothing more was needed but the
positive assurance of large areas of good land, and a way to reach it.
It was ten years after the close of Pontiac's war before both of these
conditions were fulfilled.

First came the definite assurance that the meadows of Kentucky were what
Gist and others had reported them to be. The Proclamation of 1763,
forbidding western settlement, did not forbid hunting in the West--and
the great emigration which started as slow as a glacier was finally put
into motion by the proof brought back to North Carolina and Virginia by
the hunters (of whom mention has been made) who went over the mountains
between 1763 and 1773. In 1766 Colonel James Smith, undaunted by his
captivity among the Indians, hunted through the southern portion of
Kentucky. In 1767 John Finley traded with the Indians in northern
Kentucky, and James Harrod and Michael Stoner were in the southern
portion of the country. Finally, in 1769 Daniel Boone came into the land
"a second Adam in another Eden." Boone reached the edge of the beautiful
Blue Grass Region and returned home in 1771 to tell of what he saw, and
to bring his family "as soon as possible to live in Kentucky, which I
esteemed a second paradise, at the risk of my life and fortune." In 1769
also, the party of stout hunters headed by Colonel James Knox reached
Kentucky, and hunted on the Green and Lower Cumberland Rivers; they were
so long absent from home that they were given the name of "The Long
Hunters." These, too, brought glowing descriptions of the fine meadows
of _Ken-ta-kee_.

At once the forests were filled with cohorts of surveyors--the vanguard
of the host under whose feet the continent was soon to tremble. These
surveyors represented the various land companies and the bounty land
seekers, who had a claim to the two hundred thousand acres promised the
Virginian soldiers in the old French war. Scores of cabins were raised
in 1774 at Harrodsburg, near Danville, on the east fork of Salt River,
on Dick's River, and on Salt River. Their erection marks the beginning
of the first settlement of the land one year previous to the breaking
out of the war of the Revolution.

These first comers found their way to Kentucky by two routes--the
Warriors' Path through Cumberland Gap, and the Ohio River, which they
reached either by the Kittanning Path up the Juniata or by Braddock's or
Forbes's Roads. Each route was dangerous and difficult beyond
description. It was a terrible road from Cumberland to Pittsburg, and
the journey down the Ohio was not more inviting. When the river was
high and afforded safe navigation it was as much a highway for red men
as for white--and these were treacherous times. When the river was low,
a thousand natural obstructions tended to daunt even the bravest
boatmen--and the Virginian backwoodsmen were not educated to contend
with such a dangerous stream as the Ohio, with its changing currents,
treacherous eddies, and thousands of sunken trees. One frontiersman who
made the river trip at an early date, cautioned those who essayed the
trip against rowing their boats at night; lest the sound of the oars
should prevent the watchman from hearing the "riffling" of the water
about the rocks and sunken trees, on which many a boat had been wrecked
with all its precious freight. The danger of river travel down such a
stream appealed with tremendous force to the early pioneers, with the
result that the majority chose the land route.

But what an alternative! A narrow trail in the forests six hundred miles
in length was the only path. It had been traversed by many even as early
as 1775, but each traveler had made it worse, and the story of the
hardships of the journey through "the Wilderness" would make even the
bravest pause. It is a hard journey today, one which cannot be made
without taxing even the strongest; what was it before the route was
dotted with cities and hamlets, before the road had been widened and
bridged, before the mountains had been graded and the swamps drained,
before the fierce lurking enemies had been driven away?

Neither Walker nor Gist traversed what became the famed Wilderness Road
to Kentucky. When the Shawanese raided Draper's Meadows, near Inglis
Ferry, in 1755, they took their prisoners away on the trail through
Powell's Valley toward Cumberland Gap; and the rescuing party which
followed them were perhaps the first white men who traveled what became
the great pioneer thoroughfare to Kentucky. It was, undoubtedly, the
route followed by the early hunters who passed through Cumberland Gap
and found the fertile meadows of which Dr. Walker was ignorant, and of
which Christopher Gist caught only a faint glimpse. Settlements sprang
up slowly beyond Inglis Ferry, but by the time of Boone's return in 1771
a few families were on the upper waters of the Holston, and settlements
had been made on the Watauga where Fort Watauga was soon to be built,
and at Wolf Hills, now Abington. These settlements were all one hundred
miles east of Cumberland Gap, and the little path thither was not yet
marked for white man's use.

But the brave Boone was as good as his word--and he did attempt to bring
his family and five other families to Kentucky in the year 1773, over
what was soon to be known as Boone's Road. This was the beginning of the
great tide of immigration through Cumberland Gap, a social movement
which for timeliness and ultimate success ranks as the most important in
the history of the central West. This initial attempt was not a success,
for the party was driven back by Indians, with loss, entirely
discouraged. But from this time on, despite Dunmore's War which now
broke out, the dream of western immigration could not be forgotten.

But all the western movement was now put at hazard by the outbreak of
this cruel, bloody war between the "Long Knives"--as the Virginians in
the Monongahela country came to be called, from the sabres that hung at
their loins--and the Shawanese north of the Ohio. As suggested, the
preceding years had been marked by continual bloodshed. It is
undoubtedly true that those Long Knives on the upper Ohio had been doing
some dreadful slashing. Perhaps the provocations were as enormous as the
crimes; surely the Indians to the north were the most bloodthirsty and
cruel of any on the continent. At the same time it is safe to say that
many of their white foes on the Ohio were inhuman marauders, whose
principal occupation was that of shooting game for a living and Indians
for sport. Even in the statement in Boone's autobiography there is a
plain suggestion of a guilty conscience on the part of those of whom he
wrote: "The settlers [in the Monongahela country], now aware that a
general warfare would be commenced by the Indians, immediately sent an
express to Williamsburg, the seat of government in Virginia,
communicating their apprehensions and soliciting protection." How aware?
Because some of the relatives of the Indian chieftain Logan had been
basely murdered, while intoxicated, on Yellow Creek?

The Virginian House of Burgesses was quick to answer this appeal of the
western colonists, and Governor Dunmore's earnestness in arranging the
campaign resulted in the short wars bearing his name. General Andrew
Lewis, a hero of Braddock's defeat, was commissioned to raise an army of
border settlers and march down the Great Kanawha; while Lord Dunmore
went northward to Pittsburg, where, in the Monogahela country, he would
recruit another army and descend the Ohio to the mouth of the Great
Kanawha. Here the armies would unite to pierce the valley of the Scioto
in which the hell-hound Shawanese dwelt.

Lewis gathered an army of eleven hundred experienced borderers from the
Watauga settlement and the Greenbriar Valley, and marched swiftly
northward. But the enemy knew of his approach, and instead of joining
Dunmore's army at the mouth of the Great Kanawha he met a barricaded
Indian horde, equal in size to his own army, and the bloody and
momentous battle of Point Pleasant was fought and won. Arriving at the
Ohio, Lewis encamped on the point of land between the two rivers. Soon
two hunters pursuing a deer encountered the Indian vanguard which was
bearing down on the ill-placed army of whites. One hunter fell dead and
the other returned with the alarming news. General Lewis, a pupil in
that school on Braddock's Road, lit his pipe and ordered the assault.
Two regiments advanced on the Indian line, which now ranged from river
to river, completely cutting it off from retreat. Both colonels
commanding were soon killed and their men began to fall back
disconcerted. Reënforcements drove the redskins back to their
entrenchments, and renewed confidence. But at last fighting became
desperate. Among his Virginians, the brave Flemming, twice wounded, kept
repeating his order, "Advance, outflank the enemy and get between them
and the river." Among his desperate followers the calm voice of
Cornstalk was heard all day long: "Be brave, be brave, be brave!" As in
the battle of Bushy Run, where the hope of the West lay with Bouquet as
it did now with Lewis, so at Point Pleasant no way of success was left,
at the close of that October day, save in strategy. The white man did
not learn to conquer the red until he learned to deal with him on his
own terms of cunning and deceit.

In desperation Lewis sent three companies up the Great Kanawha under
cover of the bank to Crooked Creek. Ascending this stream with great
caution, these heroes of the day rushed from its bed upon the enemy's
flank, and the tide of the battle was turned. The Indians, though having
suffered least, fell back across the Ohio to their villages to the
northward. The proposed junction of the two white armies was achieved,
but Lewis had already sufficiently awed the Shawanese, who came to
Dunmore's Camp Charlotte in their valley, and gave their affirmation to
the Fort Stanwix Treaty, which surrendered to the whites all the
territory south of the Ohio and north of the Tennessee.

In less than a year Boone went through the Gap alone to the "Falls of
the Ohio" (Louisville), and returned in safety, more possessed than ever
with the ambition to take his family to the El Dorado which he had
discovered, and of which he spoke in the enthusiastic vein which has
already been quoted. He had found the splendid lands of which Gist had
guessed; he had found a straight path thither. All that was lacking was
an impetus to turn a floodtide of Virginians and their neighbors into
the new land.

This came, too, within a year after the close of Dunmore's War--an
artificial impetus in the shape of a land company, headed by a brave,
enterprising man, Colonel Richard Henderson, with whom were associated
eight other North Carolinians of high social standing. Richard Henderson
was the son of Samuel Henderson (1700) and Elizabeth Williams (1714). He
was born in Hanover County, Virginia, on the twentieth of April, 1735.
His two well-known brothers, Nathaniel and Pleasant, were born in 1736
and 1756, respectively. The sons were worthy of their good Scotch-Welsh
ancestry. When Richard was about ten years of age his father moved from
their home in Virginia to Granville County in the province of North
Carolina. Here the elder Henderson was afterward appointed sheriff of
his county, and the young Richard was soon able to assist his father by
doing the business "of the sherriffltry."[4]

After this practical introduction to the science of law young Richard
turned to the theoretical study, and read law for a twelve-month with
his cousin, Judge Williams. In that day a prospective barrister was
compelled to get a certificate from the chief-justice of his colony;
this he presented to the governor, who, being satisfied as to the
candidate's acquirements, gave him a license. Richard Henderson's
self-confidence and genuine talent are exhibited by the story which his
brother records, of his attempting to obtain a license to practice law
after the brief period of study mentioned above.

Procuring a certificate from the chief-justice he presented himself to
the governor of North Carolina as a candidate for a license.

"How long have you read law and what books have you studied?" asked the
governor.

"Twelve months," replied young Henderson, naming the books he had used.

The governor replied brusquely that it was wholly unnecessary for him to
take the time to give an examination, as no one could in that length of
time and with such books become proficient.

"Sir," replied Richard Henderson not a whit dismayed, "I am an applicant
for examination; it is your duty to examine me and if found worthy, to
grant me a license; if otherwise, to refuse one."

It can well be imagined how quickly the governor bristled up and how
mercilessly he would "quiz" a lad who informed him in such a spirited
manner what the duties of his office required of him. But the running
fire of questions did not daunt the candidate more than had the
governor's indifference--and the young Richard received at the close of
the interview, not only a license, but what meant more, many encomiums
from his governor.

Henderson soon acquired a good practice and became a judge on the bench
of the Superior Court. In 1774 the conflict with the British agent in
North Carolina was precipitated, and the colonial government was
abolished. It was at this time that Judge Henderson became interested in
the desire of the Cherokee Indians to sell land. Henderson's plan was to
purchase from the Cherokees the great territory lying south of the
Kentucky River--one-half the present state of Kentucky. This was quite
against the laws and traditions of the only colony which had any valid
claim to the territory--Virginia, his native state--but this seemed to
matter not to Henderson and his associates; these were John Williams,
under whom Henderson had studied law, Leonard Henley Bullock, James
Hogg, Nathaniel Thomas, David Hart, John Luttrell, and William
Johnstone. At the very beginning of the century Virginia had passed an
act forbidding the private purchase of lands from the Indians. The
founders of Transylvania evidently doubted Virginia's sweeping claims
to the entire interior of the continent--at any rate land companies
seemed to be the only means by which the vast wildernesses beyond the
mountains could be opened up and settled. Though Virginia soon proved
the invalidity of the purchase, she at the same time was frank enough to
admit that Henderson's Company had done a good work in giving an impetus
to westward expansion, by appropriately recompensing the North
Carolinians for their expenditure and labors.

Henderson's purchase was gigantic in its proportions, embracing nearly
twenty million acres. The consideration was ten thousand pounds
sterling. The purchase was made at the advance settlement at Watauga,
March 17, 1775--only a month before the outbreak at Lexington and
Concord. Henderson employed Boone to assist in the transaction, and
immediately after engaged him to mark out the road through Cumberland
Gap to a settlement in Kentucky, where the Transylvania Company (as
Henderson strangely named his organization) was to begin the occupation
of the empire it had nominally secured. Of this Boone writes modestly
that he was "solicited by a number of North Carolina gentlemen, that
were about purchasing the lands lying on the south side of the Kentucky
River, from the Cherokee Indians, to attend their treaty at Watauga, in
March, 1775, to negotiate with them, and mention the boundaries of the
purchase. This I accepted, and at the request of the same gentlemen
undertook to mark out a road in the best passage from the settlement
through the wilderness to Kentucky, with such assistance as I thought
necessary to employ for such an important undertaking."

As in the case of Nemacolin's Path across the Alleghenies, so now a
second westward Indian pathway was blazed for white man's use; and if
the Transylvania Colony can in no other respect be said to have been
successful, it certainly conferred an inestimable good upon Virginia and
North Carolina and the nation, when it marked out through the hand of
Boone the Wilderness Road to Kentucky. From Watauga the path led up to
the Gap, where it joined the great Warrior's Path which came down
through Kentucky from the Scioto Valley in Ohio. For about fifty miles
Boone's Road followed this path northward, whereupon, leaving the Indian
trail, Boone bore to the west, marking his course on a buffalo trace
toward "Hazel Patch" to the Rockcastle. The buffalo path was followed
onward up Roundstone Creek, through "Boone's Gap" in Big Hill; through
the present county of Madison, Kentucky; and down little Otter Creek to
the Kentucky River. Here Boonesborough was built for the Transylvania
Colony, which became the temporary center of Kentucky.

Felix Walker, one of Boone's road-making party, made an autobiographical
statement about 1824 of this brave attempt to cut a white man's path
into Kentucky. From this statement these quotations from De Bow's
_Review_ (1854) are pertinent:

"The treaty (at Watauga) being concluded and the purchase made, we
proceeded on our journey to meet Col. Daniel Boon, with other
adventurers, bound to the same country; accordingly we met and
rendezvoused at the Long Island on Holsteen river, united our small
force with Colonel Boon and his associates, his brother, Squire Boon,
and Col. Richard Callaway, of Virginia. Our company, when united,
amounted to 30 persons. We then, by general consent, put ourselves under
the management and control of Col. Boon, who was to be our pilot and
conductor through the wilderness, to the promised land.... About the
10th of March we put off from the Long Island, marked out our track with
our hatchets, crossed Clinch and Powell's river, over Cumberland
mountain, and crossed Cumberland river--came to a watercourse called by
Col.--Rockcastle river; killed a fine bear on our way, camped all night
and had an excellent supper. On leaving that river, we had to encounter
and cut our way through a country of about twenty miles, entirely
covered with dead brash, which we found a difficult and laborious task.
At the end of which we arrived at the commencement of a cane country,
traveled about thirty miles through thick cane and reed, and as the cane
ceased, we began to discover the pleasing and rapturous appearance of
the plains of Kentucky. A new sky and strange earth seemed to be
presented to our view.... A sad reverse overtook us two days after, on
our way to Kentucky river. On the 25th of March, 1775, we were fired on
by the Indians, in our camp asleep, about an hour before day. Capt.
Twetty was shot in both knees, and died the third day after. A black
man, his body servant, killed dead; myself badly wounded; our company
dispersed. So fatal and tragical an event cast a deep gloom of
melancholy over all our prospects, and high calculations of long life
and happy days in our newly-discovered country were prostrated; hope
vanished from the most of us, and left us suspended in the tumult of
uncertainty and conjecture. Col. Boon, and a few others, appeared to
possess firmness and fortitude. In our calamitous situation, a
circumstance occurred one morning after our misfortunes that proved the
courage and stability of our few remaining men (for some had gone back).
One of our men, who had run off at the fire of the Indians on our camp,
was discovered peeping from behind a tree, by a black woman belonging
to Colonel Callaway, while gathering some wood. She ran in and gave the
alarm of Indians. Colonel Boon instantly caught his rifle, ordered the
men to form, take trees, and give battle, and not to run till they saw
him fall. They formed agreeably to his directions, and I believe they
would have fought with equal bravery to any Spartan band ever brought to
the field of action, when the man behind the tree announced his name and
came in.... At length I was carried in a litter between two horses,
twelve miles, to Kentucky river, where we made a station, and called it
Boonsborough, situated in a plain on the south side of the river,
wherein was a lick with two sulphur springs strongly impregnated.... In
the sequel and conclusion of my narrative I must not neglect to give
honor to whom honor is due. Colonel Boone conducted the company under
his care through the wilderness, with great propriety, intrepidity and
courage; and was I to enter an exception to any part of his conduct, it
would be on the ground that he appeared void of fear and of
consequence--too little caution for the enterprise. But let me, with
feeling recollection and lasting gratitude, ever remember the
unremitting kindness, sympathy, and attention paid to me by Col. Boone
in my distress. He was my father, my physician, and friend; he attended
me as his child, cured my wounds by the use of medicines from the woods,
nursed me with paternal affection until I recovered, without the
expectation of reward."

[Illustration: PLAT OF BOONESBOROUGH
[_Based on a copy of the original in possession of John Stevens_]]

It was altogether fitting that among the very first to follow Boone's
blazed road to Kentucky we should find Judge Henderson and his
fellow-promoters of the Transylvania Company. Nothing shows more plainly
the genuineness of their purposes and the heroism of their spirit. They
were not foisting on their countrymen a hazardous scheme by which they
should profit, while others bore the brunt of the toil and danger. True,
Henderson had, purposely or unwittingly, ignored the technicality of
Virginia's claim to the possession of the West; but, with an honesty
unparalleled at that day in such matters, they met the representatives
of the real owners of the lands they desired, and had purchased them
and paid down the purchase money. There is almost no doubt that they
could have satisfied Virginia's technicalities at a less cost; and then
have gone, as so many have done, to fortify their possessions and "fight
it out" with the genuine owners of the soil, who would eventually get
nothing and lose everything.

This Judge Henderson did not do; nor did he sit down comfortably at home
and send others to turn his holdings into money. He arose and
started--amid dangers that shall not be mentioned lest they be
minimized--for far-away Kentucky, on the little roadway Boone was
opening.

Henderson's party left Fort Watauga March 20, 1775, and arrived at the
infant Boonesborough April 20. The leader of the party fortunately kept
a record, though meager, of this notable journey. This precious yellow
diary is preserved by the Wisconsin Historical Society. It reads:

                                         "Monday March 20th 1775

Having finished my Treaty with the Indians, at Wataugah Sett out for
Louisa & arrived at John Shelbeys in the Evening--Tuesday the 21^{st}
went to M^r John Seviers in Company of Col^o Williams & Col^o Hart &
staid that day--Wednesday the 22^d--Mess^{rs} Williams & Hart set off
Home & I staid with M^r Sevier Thursday 23^d Still at M^r Seviers--N. B.
because our Horses were lost tho. not uneasiy as Mess^{rs} Hart and
Letteral made a poor Hand of Traveling--

Friday 24^{th} Sett of in pursuit of M^r Hart & Letteral. Overtook them
Both & Lodged at Capt Bledsoe's--

Satterday the 25^{th}. came to M^{rs} Callaway's.

Sunday 26^{th} staid there.

Monday 27^{th} Emplied in storeing away Goods.

Tuesday 28^{th}--Sett off for Louisa

Wednesday Continued Journey. N. B. M^r Luttrel not come up.

Thursday 30^{th} Arrived at Cap^t Martins in Powels Valey--

Fryday 31^{st} Imploy'd in makeing house to secure the Waggons as we
could not possibly clear the road any further. N. B. My Waggon & Sam^l
Hendersons came up in A.M. W. Luttrel in the Evin^g

Satterday the 1 day of April--Imploy'd in making ready for packing &^c
M^r Hart came up--

Sunday 2^d Continued at Capt^t Martins Waiting for the Waggon Monday the
3^d Still continued Waiting for the Waggon--

Tuesday the 4^{th}--Still continued Waiting for the Waggon. The same
evening the Waggon arrived--tho so Late we cood Not proceed--

Wednesday 5^{th} Started off with our pack Horses ab^t. 3 oClock Traveld
about 5 Miles to a Large Spring. The Same evening M^r Litteral went out
a Hunting & has Not yet returned. [Next. Both Henderson and Sa^l Durning
went in pursuit of him--_erased in diary_.] The same evening Sam^l.
Hendersons & John Farriers Horses took a Scare with there packs Run away
with Sams Saddle & Briddle. Farrars Saddle Baggs other things Damaged.
Next Morning Sam^l Henderson & Farrar went in pursuit of there Horses.
Saddle &c--the same Evening John Farrar returnd to our Camp with News
that they had found all there goods. But two of there horses were
Missing

Thursday 6 sent John Farrar Back with provission to meet & Assist Sam
Henderson with orders to stay with him, till they overtook Us, as we
promis'd to wait for them at Cumberland Gap

Fryday the 7^{th}--Sam^l. Henderson & John Farrar Returned to us with
there Horses Packs & every thing safe.

we having waited at our Camp 10 miles below Martins for them

[Thursday the 6^{th}--_erased_]. Traveled about Six Miles to the last
Settlement in Powels Valey where we were obliged to stop and kill a Beef
wait for Sam Henderson & [N. B?] this was done whilst waiting for Sam^l
Henderson as afo[re mentioned]

Fryday the 7^{th}. About Brake of Day begun to snow, About 11 ^oClock
received a letter from M^r Littereals camp that were five persons kill'd
on the road to the Cantuckee by Indians--Cap^t Hart, uppon the receipt
of this News Retreated back with his Company & determin'd to Settle in
the Valley to make Corn for the Cantuckey People

The same Day Received a Letter from Da^n. Boone. that his Company was
fired uppon by Indians Kill'd Two of his men--tho he kept the ground &
saved the Baggage &c.

Satterday the 8^{th}. Started ab^t. 10 ^oClock Cross'd Cumberland Gap
about 4 Miles Met about 40 persons Returning from the Cantuckey. on
Acc^t. of the Late Murder by the Indians could prevail one one [_sic_]
only to return. Mem^o Several Virginians who were with us returned.

Sunday the 9^{th}. Arrived at Cumberland River where we met Rob^t Wills
& his son returning &c

Monday 10^{th}. Dispach^d Cap^t Cocke to the Cantukey to Inform Cap^t
Boone that we were on the road Continued at Camp that day on Acc^t of
the Badness of the Wether

Tuesday 11^{th} started from Cumberl^d. made a very good days Travel of
Near 20 Mile Kill'd Beef &c.

Wednesday the 12 Travel'd about 5 Miles, prevented going any further by
the rains & high water at Richland Creek--

Thursday the 13^{th}. Last Night arrived men [of] our Camp Stewart & ten
other men, campt within half mile of us on there Return from Lousia
Campt. that Night at Larrel River--they had well nigh turnd three or
four of our Virg & us back.

Fryday the 14. Traveld about 12 Miles to a Camp &c

Satterday the 15^{th}. Traveld about 18 Miles & campt on the North side
of Rock Castle River.--this River's a fork of Cumberland--lost an ax
this morn at Camp.

Sunday the 16^{th}. About 12 oClock Met Jemes McAfee with 18 other
persons Returning from Cantuckey Traveld about 22 Miles and Campt on the
head of Dicks River where Luna from Mc.Afees camp came to us resolved to
go to the Louisa--

Monday 17^{th} Started about 3 oClock prevented by Rain. Traveld 7 Miles

Tuesday the 18^{th}. Traveld about 16 Miles, met Michael Stoner with
Pack Horses to assist us. Campt that Night in the Edge of the Rich
Land--Stoner brought us Excellent Beef in plenty

Wednesday 19^{th}. Traveld about 16 Miles Campt on Oter Creek--a good
mill place

Thursday the 20^{th}. Arrived at Fort Boone. on the Mouth of Oter Creek
Cantukey River--where we were Saluted by a running fire of about 25
Guns; all that was then at Fort--The men appeared in high Spirits &
much rejoiced on our arrival"[5]

Colonel Henderson (as the leader of the Transylvania Colony is best
known) arrived at Boonesborough one day after the outbreak of the
Revolutionary struggle at Lexington and Concord, and on his own fortieth
birthday.

A clearer glimpse of the fortunes of this company of pilgrims who
followed in Boone's wake is preserved for us in the journal kept by
William Calk, who was with Hart's party that Henderson met at Martin's
cabin on the second of April. The original manuscript is in the
possession of the family of the late Mr. Thomas Calk, near Mt. Sterling,
Kentucky.

It reads:

"1775 Mond. 13th--I set out from prince wm. to travel to caintuck on
tuesday Night our company all got together at Mr. Prises on rapadan
which was Abraham hanks[6] philip Drake Eaneck Smith Robert Whitledge &
my Self, thear Abrams Dogs leg got Broke By Drake's Dog.

Wedns. 15th,--We started early from prises made a good Days travel &
lodge this night at Mr. Cars on North fork James River.

Thurs. 16th,--We started early it raind Chief part of the Day Snowd in
the Eavening very hard & was very Coald we traveld all Day & got to Mr.
Blacks at the foot of the Blue Ridge.

fryd. 17th--We start early cross the Ridge the wind Blows very hard &
cold and lodge at James loyls.

Satrd. 18th--We git this Day to William Andersons at Crows ferrey &
there we Stay till monday morning.

Mond. 20th--We start early cross the fery and lodge this night at Wm.
Adamses on the head of Catauby.

tuesd. 21st--We start early and git over pepers ferey on new river &
lodge at pepers this night.

Wedns 22d--We start early and git to foart Chissel whear we git some
good loaf Bread & good whiskey.

thurs 23d--we start early & travel till a good while in the Night and
git to major Cammels on holston River.

fryday 24th--we start early & turn out of the wagon Road to go across
the mountains to go by Danil Smiths we loose Driver Come to a turabel
mountain that tired us all almost to death to git over it & we lodge
this night on the Lawrel fork of holston under agrait mountain & Roast a
fine fat turkey for our suppers & Eat it without aney Bread.

Satrd 25th--We start early travel over Some more very Bad mountains one
that is caled Clinch mountain & we git this night to Danil Smiths on
Clinch and there we staid till thursday morning on tuesday night &
wednesday morning it snowd Very hard and was very Coald & we hunted a
good deal there while we staid in Rough mountains and kild three deer &
one turkey Eanock Abram & I got lost tuesday night & it a snowing &
Should a lain in the mountains had not I a had a pocket compas By which
I got in a littel in the night and fired guns and they heard them and
caim in By the Repoart.

thursd 30th--We set out again & went down to Elk gardin and there suplid
our Selves With Seed Corn & irish tators then we went on a littel way I
turnd my hors to drive afore me & he got scard ran away threw Down the
Saddel Bags and broke three of our powder goards & Abrams beast Burst
open a walet of corn & lost a good Deal & made a turrabel flustration
amongst the Reast of the Horses Drakes mair run against a sapling & noct
it down we cacht them all agin & went on & lodgd at John Duncans.

fryd 31st--We Suployd our Selves at Dunkans with a 108 pounds of Bacon &
went on again to Brileys mill & suployd our Selves with meal & lodged
this night on Clinch By a large cainbraike & cuckt our Suppers.

April Satrd first--this morning there is ice at our camp half inch thick
we start early & travel this Day along a verey Bad hilley way cross one
creek whear the horses almost got mired some fell in & all wet their
loads we cross Clinch River & travell till late in the Night & camp on
Cove creek having two men with us that wair pilates.

Sund 2d--this morning is a very hard frost we Start early travel over
powels mountain and camp in the head of Powels valey whear there is
verey good food.

mond 3d We Start early travel down the valey cross powels River go some
throu the woods without aney track cross some Bad hils git into
hendersons Road camp on a creek in powels valey.

Tuesday 4th Raney, we Start about 10 oclock and git down to Capt.
martins in the valey where we over take Coln henderson & his Companey
Bound for Caintuck & there we camp this Night there they were Broiling &
Eating Beef without Bread.

Wednesday 5th Breaks away fair & we go on down the valey & camp on
indian Creek we had this creek to cross maney times & very Bad Banks
Abrams saddel turnd & the load all fell in we go out this Eavening &
kill two Deer.

thurs 6th this morning is ahard frost & we wait at Camp for Coln
henderson & companey to come up they come up about 12 o'clock & we join
with them and camp there Still this night waiting for some part of the
companey that had thier horses ran away with their packs.

fryday 7th this morning is a very hard snowey morning we still continue
at Camp Being in number about 40 men & Some neagros this Eaven--Comes a
letter from Capt. Boone at caintuck of the indians doing mischief and
some turns back.

1775

Satrd April 8th--We all pact up and started crost Cumberland gap about
one oclock this Day We Met a great maney peopel turned Back for fear of
the indians but our Companey goes on Still with good courage we come to
a very ugly Creek with steep Banks & have it to cross several times on
this Creek we camp this night.

Sunday 9th--this morning we wait at camp for the cattle to Be drove up
to kill a Beef tis late Before they come & peopel makes out alittel
snack & agree to go on till Night we git to Cumberland River & there we
camp meet 2 more men turn Back.

Monday 10th--this is alowry morning & very like for Rain & we keep at
Camp this day and some goes out ahunting. I & two more goes up avery
large mountain Near the tops we saw the track of two indians & whear
they had lain unter some Rocks some of the companey went over the River
a bofelo hunting but found None at night Capt. hart comes up with his
packs & there they hide some of thier lead to lighten thier packs that
they may travel faster.

tuesday 11th--this is a very loury morning & like for Rain But we all
agree to start Early we cross Cumberland River & travel Down it about 10
miles through Some turrabel cainbrakes as we went down abrams mair ran
into the River with Her load & Swam over he folowd her & got on her &
made her Swim Back agin it is a very raney Eavening we take up Camp near
Richland Creek they kill a beef Mr. Drake Bakes Bread without washing
his hands we Keep Sentry this Night for fear of the indians.

Wednesday 12th this is a Raney morning But we pack up & go on we come to
Richland Creek it is high we toat our packs over on a tree & swim our
horses over & there we meet another Companey going Back they tell such
News Abram & Drake is afraid to go aney further there we camp this
night.

thursday 13th this morning the weather Seems to breake & Be fair Abram &
Drake turn Back we go on & git to loral River we come to a creek Before
wheare we are able to unload & toate our packs over on a log this day we
meet about 20 more turning Back we are obligd to toat our packs over
loral river & swim our horses one hors Ran in with his pack & lost it in
the River & they got it agin.

fryday 14th--this is a clear morning with a smart frost we go on & have
a very mire Road and camp this Night on a creek of loral River and are
surprisd at camp By a wolf.

Satterday 15th clear with a Small frost we start early we meet Some men
that turns & goes With us we travel this Day through the plais caled the
Bressh & crofs Rockcass River & camp ther this Night & have fine food
for our horses.

Sunday 16th--cloudy & warm we start early & go on about 2 mile down the
River and then turn up a creek that we crost about 50 times Some very
bad foards with a great Deal of very good land on it in the Eavening we
git over to the waters of Caintuck & go a littel Down the creek & there
we camp keep sentry the forepart of the night it Rains very har all
night.

monday 17th this is a very rany morning But breaks about a 11 oclock &
we go on and camp this Night in several companeys on Some of the creeks
of Caintuck.

tuesday 18th fair & cool and we go on about 10 oclock we meet 4 men from
Boons camp that caim to cunduck us on we camp this night just on the
Begining of the good land near the Blue lick they kill 2 bofelos this
Eavening.

Wednesd 19th Smart frost this morning they kill 3 bofelos about 11
oclock we come to where the indians fired on Boons company & kild 2 men
& a dog & wounded one man in the thigh we campt this night on oter
creek.

thursday 20th this morning is clear and cool. We start early and git
Down to caintuck to Boons foart about 12 o'clock wheare we stop they
come out to meet us & welcom us in with a voley of guns.

fryday 21st warm this Day they Begin laying off lots in the town and
prearing for peopel to go to worck to make corn.

Satterday 22nd they finish laying out lots this Eavening I went
a-fishing and cactht 3 cats they meet in the night to Draw for choise
of lots but refer it till morning

1775

Sunday April 23d this morning the peopel meets & Draws for chois of
loots this is a very warm day.

monday 24th We all view our loots & Some Dont like them about 12 oclock
the Combses come to town & Next morning they make them a bark canew and
Set off down the River to meet their Companey.

tuesday 25th in the eavening we git us a plaise at the mouth of the
creek & begin clearing.

Wednesday 26th We Begin Building us a house & a plaise of Defense to
Keep the indians off this day we Begin to live without Bread.

thursday 27th Raney all Day But We Still keep about our house.

Satterday 29th--We git our house kivered with Bark & move our things
into it at Night and Begin houskeeping Eanock Smith Robert Whitledge &
my Self.

May, Monday first I go out to look for my mair and saw 4 bufelos the
Being the first that I Saw & I shot one of them but did not git him when
I caim Home Eanock & Robin had found the mair & was gone out a hunting
& did Not come in for--Days and kild only one Deer.

tuesday 2d I went out in the morning & kild a turkey and come in & got
some on for my breakfast and then went & Sot in to clearing for
Corn."[7]

The personal statement of Mrs. Elizabeth Thomas is of interest in this
connection. She was one of Col. Calloway's company that followed
Henderson in September 1775. This statement is preserved in the library
of the Wisconsin Historical Society and reads:

"I was born in Virginia on the 4^{th} day of Sept 1764 In Rockbridge
county near the Natural Bridge my father moved on the North Fork of
Holston within 4 or 5 miles of Abbingdon & remained there two or three
years and in March 1775 we moved down Holstien near the Big Island,
[Long Island] where we remained until Sept 1775 when Col Calloway and
his company came along going to Kentucky, when my father William Pogue
packed up and came with him with our family, Col Boone and with his
wife and family and Col Hugh Mcgary, Thomas Denton and Richard Hogan
were on the road before us and when we arrived at Boonesborough the
latter part of September There was only fur [four] or six cabbins built
along on the Bank of the Kentucky river but not picketted in being open
on two sides."[8]

This was the great pathway of early pioneers to Kentucky, and the course
of the marvelous floodtide of immigration which swept over the mountains
in the last three decades of the eighteenth century.

[Illustration: FILSON'S MAP OF KENTUCKY (1784)]

The itineraries of early travelers describe the Wilderness Road in
definite terms. One of the earliest is that given by John Filson, whose
history of Kentucky was published as early as 1784. It described the
route from Philadelphia to Louisville (eight hundred and twenty-six
miles), as follows:

                                   Miles
  From Philadelphia to Lancaster,     66
  To Wright's on the Susquehanna,     10
  To Yorktown,                        12
  To Abbotstown,                      15
  To Hunterstown,                     10
  To mountain at Black's Gap,          3
  To other side of the mountain,       7
  To Stone-house Tavern,              25
  To Wadkin's Ferry on Potomac        14
  To Martinsburg,                     13
  To Winchester,                      13
  To Newtown,                          8
  To Stoverstown,                     10
  To Woodstock,                       12
  To Shenandoah River,                15
  To North Branch Shenandoah,         29
  To Staunton,                        15
  To North Fork James River,          37
  To Botetourt C. H.,                 12
  To Woods on Catawba River           21
  To Paterson.s. on Roanoke,           9
  To Alleghany Mountain,               8
  To New River,                       12
  To Forks of Road,                   16
  To Fort Chissel,                    12
  To Stone Mill,                      11
  To Boyds,                            8
  To Head of Holstein,                 5
  To Washington C. H.,                45
  To the Block-house,                 35
  To Powell Mountain,                 33
  To Walden's Ridge,                   3
  To Valley Station,                   4
  To Martin's Cabin,                  25
  To Cumberland Mountain,             20
  To Cumberland River,                13
  To Flat Lick,                        9
  To Stinking Creek,                   2
  To Richland Creek,                   7
  Down Richland Creek,                 8
  To Racoon Spring,                    6
  To Laurel River,                     2
  To Hazel Patch,                     15
  To Rockcastle River,                10
  To English Station,                 25
  To Col. Edward's Crab Orchard,       3
  To Whitley's Station,                5
  To Logan's Station,                  5
  To Clark's Station,                  7
  To Crow's Station,                   4
  To Harrod's Station,                 3
  To Harlands',                        4
  To Harbisons,                       10
  To Bardstown,                       25
  To Salt Works,                      25
  To Falls of the Ohio,               20
                                     ---
                                     826

Mr. Speed preserves for us the itinerary with "observations and
occurrences" of William Brown, the father of Judge Alfred M. Brown, of
Elizabeth town, Kentucky. "It is contained in a small manuscript book,"
writes Mr. Speed, "which has been preserved in the family. It is
especially interesting from the fact that immediately upon his arrival
in Kentucky, by the journey of which he made a complete record, the
Battle of Blue Licks occurred. He aided in burying the slain, among whom
was his own brother, James Brown." The itinerary and "observations and
occurrences" follow:[9]

    (1782)

  "Hanover to Richmond, Henrico Co.,          18
  To Widow Simpson's, Chesterford,            14
  To Powhatan Co. House,                      16
  To Joseph Thompson's at the forks of
    the road,                                  8
  To Long's Ordinary, Buckingham,              9
  To Hoolen's on Willis Creek,                 8
  To Mrs. Sanders, Cumberland,                 3
  To Widow Thompson's passing Hood's and
    Swiney's,                                 27
  To Captain Hunter's,                         5
  To Thompson's on the Long Mo., Campbell,     5
  To Dupriest,                                 6
  To New London,                              10
  To Liberty Town,                            16
  To Yearley's, at Goose Creek, Bedford,      12
  To M. Loland, at the Blue Ridge Gap,         6
  To Big Flat Lick,                           10
  To Fort Lewis, Botetourt,                   12
  To Hans' Meadows,                           20
  To English's Ferry, New River,              12
  To Fort Chiswell,                           30
  To Atkins' Ordinary,                        19
  To Mid Fork Holstein,                       --
  To Cross White's, Montgomery,                3
  To Col. Arthur Campbell's,                   3
  To 7-mile Ford of Holstein,                  6
  To Maj. Dysart's Mill,                      12
  To Washington Co. House,                    10
  To Head of Reedy Creek, Sullivan Co.,
    North Carolina,                           20
  To Block House,                             13
  To North Fork Holstein,                      2
  To Moccasin Gap,                             5
  To Clinch River,                            11
  To Ford of Stock Creek,                      2
  To Little Flat Lick,                         5
  To North Fork of Clinch,                     1
  To Powell's Mountain,                        1
  To Wallan Ridge,                             5
  To Valley Station,                           5
  To Powell's River,                           2
  To Glade Spring,                             4
  To Martin's Station,                        19
  To Big Spring,                              12
  To Cumberland Mountain Gap,                  8
  To Yellow Creek,                             2
  To Cumberland River,                        13
  To Big Flat Lick,                            9
  To Little Richland Creek,                   10
  To Big Richland Creek,                       1
  To Robinson Creek,                          10
  To Raccoon Spring,                           1
  To Laurel River,                             2
  To Little Laurel River,                      5
  To Raccoon Creek,                            8
  To Hazel Patch,                              4
  To Rockcastle Creek,                         6
  To Rockcastle River,                         7
  To Scaggs' Creek,                            5
  To Head of Dicks River,                     15
  To English Station,                          8
  To Crab Orchard,                             3
  To Logan's Old Fort,                        11
  To Doehurty's Station,                       8
  To Harrod's Station,                         6
  To Harrodsburg,                              6
  From Hanover to Harrodsburg is 555 miles.

_Observations and Occurrences_: Set Out from Hanover Monday, 27th May,
1782; arrived at the Block-house about the first week in July. The road
from Hanover to this place is generally very good; crossing the Blue
Ridge is not bad; there is not more than a small hill with some winding
to go over. Neither is the Alleghany Mountain by any means difficult at
this gap. There are one or two high hills about New River and Fort
Chiswell. The ford of New River is rather bad; therefore we thought it
advisable to cross in the ferry-boat. This is generally a good-watered
road as far as the Block-house. We waited hereabouts near two weeks for
company, and then set out for the wilderness with twelve men and ten
guns, this being Thursday, 18th July. The road from this until you get
over Wallen's Ridge generally is bad, some part very much so,
particularly about Stock Creek and Stock Creek Ridge. It is a very
mountainous country hereabout, but there is some fine land in the
bottoms, near the watercourses, in narrow slips. It will be but a thin
settled country whenever it is settled. The fords of Holstein and Clinch
are both good in dry weather, but in a rainy season you are often
obliged to raft over. From them along down Powell's Valley until you get
to Cumberland Gap is pretty good; this valley is formed by Cumberland
Mountain on the northwest, and Powell Mountain on the southeast, and
appears to bear from northeast southwestwardly, and is, I suppose, about
one hundred miles in length, and from ten to twelve miles in breadth.
The land generally is good, and is an exceeding well-watered country, as
well as the country on Holstein River, abounding with fine springs and
little brooks. For about fifty miles, as you travel along the valley,
Cumberland Mountain appears to be a very high ridge of white rocks,
inaccessible in most places to either man or beast, and affords a wild,
romantic prospect. The way through the gap is not very difficult, but
from its situation travelers may be attacked in some places, crossing
the mountain, by the enemy to a very great disadvantage. From thence
until you pass Rockcastle River there is very little good road; this
tract of country is very mountainous, and badly watered along the trace,
especially for springs. There is some good land on the water-courses,
and just on this side Cumberland River appears to be a good tract, and
within a few years I expect to have a settlement on it. Some parts of
the road are very miry in rainy weather. The fords of Cumberland and
Rockcastle are both good unless the waters be too high; after you cross
Rockcastle there are a few high hills, and the rest of the way tolerable
good; the land appears to be rather weak, chiefly timbered with oak,
etc. The first of the Kentucky waters you touch upon is the head of
Dick's River, just eight miles from English's. Here we arrived Thursday,
25th inst., which is just seven days since we started from the
Block-house. Monday, 29th inst., I got to Harrodsburg, and saw brother
James. The next day we parted, as he was about setting off on a journey
to Cumberland.

On Monday, August 19th, Colonel John Todd, with a party of one hundred
and eighty-two of our men, attacked a body of Indians, supposed to
number six or seven hundred, at the Blue Lick, and was defeated, with
the loss of sixty-five persons missing and slain.

_Officers lost_: Colonels--John Todd and Stephen Trigg; Majors--Edward
Bulger and Silas Harlan; Captains--W. McBride, John Gordon, Jos.
Kincaid, and Clough Overton; Lieutenants--W. Givens, and John Kennedy;
Ensign--John McMurtry.

In this action brother James fell. On Saturday 24th inst., Colonel
Logan, with four hundred and seventy men, went on the battle-ground and
buried the slain; found on the field, slain, forty-three men, missing,
twenty-two, in all sixty-five.

I traveled but little about the country. From English's to Harrodsburg
was the farthest west, and from Logan's Fort to the Blue Lick the
farthest north. Thus far the land was generally good--except near and
about the Lick it was very poor and badly timbered--generally badly
watered, but pretty well timbered. At Richmond Ford, on the Kentucky
River, the bank a little below the ford appears to be largely upward of
a hundred feet perpendicular of rock.

On my return to Hanover I set off from John Craigs' Monday, 23d
September, 1782; left English's Tuesday, 1 o'clock, arrived at the
Block-house the Monday evening following, and kept on the same route
downward chiefly that I traveled out. Nothing material occurred to me.
Got to Hanover sometime about the last of October the same year."

Thomas Speed's grandfather gives the following itinerary from "Charlotte
Court-House to Kentucky" under date of 1790:

                                      Miles
    "From Charlotte Court-House
  to Campbell Court-House,               41
  To New London,                         13
  To Colonel James Callaway's,            3
  To Liberty,                            13
  To Colonel Flemming's,                 28
  To Big Lick,                            2
  To Mrs. Kent's,                        20
  To English's Ferry,                    20
  To Carter's,                           13
  To Fort Chissel,                       12
  To the Stone-mill,                     11
  To Adkins',                            16
  To Russell Place,                      16
  To Greenaway's,                        14
  To Washington Court-House,              6
  To the Block-house,                    35
  To Farriss's,                           5
  To Clinch River,                       12
  To Scott's Station,                    12
  To Cox's at Powell River,              10
  To Martin's Station,                    2
  To--[manuscript defaced]
  To Cumberland Mountain                  3
  To Cumberland River,                   15
  To Flat Lick,                           9
  To Stinking Creek,                      2
  To Richland Creek,                      7
  To Raccoon Spring,                     14
  To Laurel River,                        2
  To Hazel Patch,                        15
  To Rockcastle,                         10
  To--[manuscript defaced]."

The foregoing itineraries afford us some conception of the settlements
and "improvements" that sprang up along the winding thoroughfare from
Virginia to Kentucky. The writer has sought with some care to know more
of these--of the modes of travel, the entertainment which was afforded
along the road to men and beasts, and the social relation of the greater
settlements in Virginia and Kentucky to this thin line of human lives
across the continent. Very little information has been secured. It is
plain that the great immigration to Kentucky would have been out of the
question had there been no means of succor and assistance along the
road. There were many who gained their livelihood as pioneer innkeepers
and provisioned along Boone's Road. Among the very few of these of whom
any record is left, Captain Joseph Martin is perhaps the most prominent
and most worthy of remembrance. Martin's "cabin" or "station," as it is
variously termed, occupied a strategic point in far-famed Powell's
Valley, one hundred and eighty miles west of Inglis Ferry, twenty miles
east of Cumberland Gap and about one hundred and thirty miles southeast
of Crab Orchard and Boonesborough. Captain Martin was Virginia Agent
for Indian affairs, and was the most prominent man in the scattered
settlements in Powell's Valley, where he was living at the time of the
founding of Boonesborough. Later he made his headquarters at Long Island
in North Carolina. It is plain from Colonel Henderson's journal that
wagons could proceed along Boone's Road in 1775 no further than Martin's
cabin. Here everything was transferred to the packhorses. Several
letters from Colonel Henderson to Captain Martin, preserved by the
Wisconsin Historical Society, give us a glimpse of silent Powell's
Valley. One of them reads:

                                                  "Boonesborough
                                                  12^{th} June 1775

  Dear Sir:

  M^r Ralph Williams, David Burnay, and William Mellar will apply to
  you for salt and other things which we left with you and was sent
  for us since we came away--Please to deliver to them, or those they
  may employ what they ask for, and take a receipt--Also write me a
  few lines informing me, what you have sent &c by hem & by whom--I
  long much to hear from you, pray write me at Large, how the matter
  goes with you in the valey, as well as what passes in Virginia--If
  the pack-horsemen should want any thing towards securing my books
  from Damage pack-saddles, provisions, or any thing which you see is
  necessary; please to let them have it on our acc^t.--All things
  goes well hitherto with us, I hope the[y] do with you would have
  sent your Mares but am afraid they are not done horsing They will
  be safely brought by my brother in a few weeks

                                        I am D^r Sir your
                                                  Hble Serv^t
                                                  Rich^d. Henderson
  M^r Joseph Martin in the Valley"[10]

On July 20 he wrote again:

"Am sorry to hear that the People in the valey are distressed for
provisions and ammunition have given some directions to my brother to
assist you a little with Powder.

Standly, I suppose has before now delivered your Inglish mare, and the
other you'l receive by my brother--when we meet will render an acc^t.
for my behaviour in Keeping them so long--We did not forget you at the
time of making Laws, your part of the Country is too remote from ours to
attend our Convention you must have Laws made by an Assembly of your
own, I have prepared a plan which I hope you'l approve but more of that
when we meet which I hope will be soon, tho 'til Col. Boone comes cant
say when--Am extreamly sorry for the affair with the Indians on the 23^d
of last month. I wish it may not have a bad effect, but will use my
endeavors to find out who they were & have the matter settled--your
spirited conduct gives me great Pleasure--Keep your men in heart if
possible, now is our time, the Indians must not drive us--depend upon it
that the Chief men and warriors of the Cherokees will not countenance
what there men attempted and will punish them--Pray my Dear Sir dont let
any person settle Lower down the valey I am affraid they are now too
low & must come away I did not want any person to settle yet below
Cumberland gap--My Brother will [tell] you of the news of these
parts--in haste D^r Sir...."

In December, John Williams wrote Captain Martin from Boonesborough and
his letter gives us a closer insight into affairs along Boone's Road:

"... With respect to the complaints of the inhabitants of Powells Valley
with regard to cattle being lodged there, I should think it altogether
unjust than [that] non-inhabitants should bring in cattle to destroy and
eat up the range of the inhabitants' stock; Yet, Sir, I cannot conceive
that Col. Hart's stopping his stock there, when on their way here, to
recruit them for their journey, can be the least infringement. Col. Hart
is a proprietor, & [has] as great a right in the country as any one man.
In the Valley are many lands yet unentered; and certainly if there be a
right in letting stock into the range, he has a right equal to any man
alive. I therefore hope you will endeavor to convince the inhabitants
thereof, and that it is no indulgence to Col. Hart, but a right he
claims, and what I think him justly entitled to.

I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you at Boonesborough the 21^{st}
instant--in the meantime making not the least doubt but that you will
use every justifiable Method in Keeping up peace and harmony in the
Valley"[11]

As indicated in the former letter, the emigrants from the colonies were
encroaching upon the Cherokee lands beyond the Henderson purchase.
Joseph Martin was under the necessity of protesting to the Assembly of
North Carolina against settlers from that state pressing beyond the
Henderson lands and settling in the Cherokee country.[12] It is seen by
Colonel Henderson's letter that Boone's Road marked the most westerly
limit to which pioneers could go with safety. Irresponsible Cherokees
invaded the Henderson purchase, and equally irresponsible (or ignorant)
whites invaded the Cherokee country. The difficulty probably lay in not
having a definite, plain boundary line that he who ran might recognize.

The settlement here in Powell's Valley meant everything to the pioneers
of Kentucky. This is made additionally plain by the attempt of
interested parties to have Captain Martin's Indian Agency removed from
Long Island to a point on Boone's Road near Cumberland Gap. In December
1782 William Christian wrote Governor Harrison from "Great [Long]
Island," explaining the dependence of the inhabitants (undoubtedly both
red and white) upon Martin in time of need. "I find," he wrote, "that
the party here, consisting of fifty odd, are living on Col. Martin's
corn. Whenever a family begins to be in a starving condition, it is very
probable they will push for this place & throw themselves upon him for
bread."[13]

Fourteen days later he wrote from Mahanaim to "Hon. Col. Sampson
Matthews" of Richmond; protesting against Virginia's Indian Agency being
kept at Long Island, North Carolina; and urging that it be removed to
near Cumberland Gap:

"The Gap is near half way betwixt our settlements on Holston and
Kentucky, and a post there would be a resting place for our poor
citizens going back and forward, and would be a great means of saving
the lives of hundreds of them. For it seldom happens that Indians will
kill people near where they trade; & it is thereabouts the most of the
mischief on the road has been done.... I view the change I propose as of
great importance to the frontier of Washington, [County] to our people
journeying to & from Kentucky, particularly the poor families moving
out...."[14]

It was, throughout the eighteenth century, exceedingly dangerous to
travel Boone's Road; and those who journeyed either way joined together
and traveled in "companies." Indeed there was risk enough for the most
daring, in any case; but a well-armed "company" of tried pioneers on
Boone's Road was a dangerous game upon which to prey. It was customary
to advertise the departure of a company either from Virginia or
Kentucky, in local papers; in order that any desiring to make the
journey might know of the intended departure. The principal rendezvous
in Kentucky was the frontier settlement of Crab Orchard. Certain of
these advertisements are extremely interesting; the verbal changes are
significant if closely read:

  Notice

    is hereby given, that a company will meet at the Crab Orchard, on
    Sunday the 4^{th} day of May, to go through the wilderness, and to
    set out on the 5^{th}. at which time most of the Delegates to the
    state convention will go[15]

    A large company will meet at the Crab orchard on sunday the
    25^{th} of May, in order to make an early start on Monday the
    26^{th} through the wilderness for the old settlement[16]

    A large company will meet at the Crab Orchard on the 15^{th}. day
    of May, in readiness to start on the 16^{th}. through the
    Wilderness for Richmond[17]

  Notice

    Is hereby given that several gentlemen propose meeting at the
    Crab-orchard on the 4^{th}. of June in perfect readiness to move
    early the next morning through the Wilderness[18]

  Notice

    A large company will meet at the Crab-Orchard the 19^{th}. of
    November in order to start the next day through the Wilderness. As
    it is very dangerous on account of the Indians, it is hoped each
    person will go well armed[19]

It appears that unarmed persons sometimes attached themselves to
companies and relied on others to protect them in times of danger. One
advertisement urged that everyone should go armed and "not to depend on
others to defend them."[20]

The frequency of the departure of such companies suggests the great
amount of travel on Boone's Road. As early as 1788 parties were
advertised to leave Crab Orchard May 5, May 15, May 26, June 4, and June
16. Nor does it seem that there was much abatement during the more
inclement (safer?) months; in the fall of the same year companies were
advertised to depart November 19, December 9, and December 19. Yet at
this season the Indians were often out waylaying travelers--driven no
doubt by hunger to deeds of desperation. The sufferings of such
redskinned marauders have found little place in history; but they are,
nevertheless, particularly suggestive. One story, which has not perhaps
been told _ad nauseam_, is to the point; and would be amusing if it were
not so fatally conclusive. In the winter of 1787-88 a party on Boone's
Road was attacked by Indians not far from the Kentucky border. Their
horses were plundered of goods, but the travelers escaped. Hurrying "in"
to the settlements a company was raised to make a pursuit. By their
tracks in the snow the Indians were accurately followed. They were
overtaken at a camp, where they were drying their blankets, &c., before
a great fire. At the first charge the savages, completely surprised,
took to their heels--stark naked. Not satisfied with recovering the
stolen goods the Kentuckians pursued the fugitives into the mountains.
Along the course they found trees stripped of pieces of bark, with which
the Indians had attempted to cover their bodies. They were not
overtaken, though some of their well protected pursuers had their own
feet frost-bitten. The awful fate of the savages is unquestionable.

Before Richard Henderson arrived in Kentucky Daniel Boone wrote him: "My
advice to you, sir, is to come or send as soon as possible. Your company
is desired greatly, for the people are very uneasy, but are willing to
stay and venture their lives with you, and now is the time to flustrate
the intentions of the Indians, and keep the country whilst we are in it.
If we give way to them now, it will ever be the case."

This letter shows plainly how the best informed man in Kentucky regarded
Henderson's settlement at Boonesborough. Henderson's purchase was
repudiated by both Virginia and North Carolina; but the Virginia
Legislature confirmed Henderson's sales of land, in so far as they were
made to actual settlers, and not to speculators, Henderson and his
associates were granted land in lieu of that taken from them. The
Transylvania Company, while looked upon askance by many who preferred to
risk their tomahawk claim rights to those the Company granted, exerted
as great a moral influence in the first settlement of Kentucky as Daniel
Boone affirmed it would--a greater influence than any other company
before the Revolutionary War.

What it meant to the American colonies to have a brave band of pioneers
in Kentucky at that crucial epoch, is an important chapter in the
history of Boone's Road.




CHAPTER IV

KENTUCKY IN THE REVOLUTION


History was fast being made in Kentucky when the Revolutionary struggle
reached the crisis in 1775 at Concord and Lexington. South of the Ohio
River Virginia's new empire was filling with the conquerors of the West.
The Mississippi Valley counted a population of thirteen thousand, three
thousand being the population of New Orleans. St. Louis, in Spanish
possession, was carrying on a brisk trade with the Indians on the
Missouri. Vincennes, the British port on the Wabash, had a population of
four hundred whites. Detroit, the metropolis of the West, numbered
fifteen hundred inhabitants, more than double the number in the dashing
days of Gladwin only a decade before. The British flag also waved at
Kaskaskia on the Mississippi, and at Sandusky. This fringe of British
forts on the north was separated from the American metropolis of the
West, Pittsburg, and from the first fortresses built in Kentucky, by
leagues of forests, dark as when Bouquet pierced them; and filled with
sullen Indian nations, awed for the time being by Dunmore's invasion,
but silently biding their time to avenge themselves for the loss of the
meadow lands of Ken-ta-kee.

Such was the condition of affairs when, in April 1775, the open struggle
for independence of the American colonies was roughly precipitated at
Lexington. It might seem to the casual observer that the colonists, who
were now hastening by way of Boone's Wilderness Road into the Virginian
Kentucky, could not feel the intense jealousy for American interests
which was felt by the patriots in the East. On the contrary, there is
evidence that these first pioneers into the West had a profound
knowledge of the situation; and a sympathy for the struggling patriots,
which was enhanced even by the distance which separated them, and the
hardships they had endured. Not a few of them, too, had known personally
of the plundering British officials and the obnoxious taxes. It is the
proud boast of Kentuckians that in the center of their beautiful Blue
Grass country was erected the first monument to the first dead of the
Revolution. A party of pioneers heard the news of the Battle of
Lexington while sitting about their camp fire. Long into the night the
rough men told and retold the news, and before morning named the new
settlement they were to make, Lexington, in honor of New England's dead.

It was not at all evident at first what the war was going to amount to
in the West. Scarcely more was known in the West of the Revolutionary
War than had been known two decades before of the French and Indian War.
But at the outset it was plain that there was to be a tremendous
struggle on both sides to gain the allegiance, as the British desired,
of the Indian nations which lay between the Ohio River and the Great
Lakes. For two years the struggle in the East went on, engrossing the
entire attention of both parties. During 1776 and 1777 the history of
the West is merely the continuation of the bloody story of the years
which led up to Dunmore's campaign, like the savage attack on Wheeling,
in September, 1777. Slowly the Indians forgot Lewis's crushing victory
at Point Pleasant, and their solemn pledges at Camp Charlotte; and were
raiding the feeble Kentucky posts with undiminished relish, or giving
the Long Knives plenty of provocation for the barbarities of which the
latter are known to have been guilty.

The opening scene of the Revolutionary War in the West was the most
important phase of the war in the history of Boone's Wilderness Road;
for at the very outset the question was decided once for all whether or
not that thin, long, priceless path to Kentucky through the Watauga
settlement was to be held or lost. If it could not be held, there was no
hope left for the brave men who had gone to found that western empire
beyond the Cumberland Mountains. With their line of retreat cut in two
by the southern Indians, they were left without hope of succor or
success: for the success of their enterprise depended upon the
inspiration their advance gave to those behind them. None would come if
the Wautauga settlement did not survive.

The British agents among the Southern Indians--the Cherokees, Creeks,
Choctaws and Chickasaws--precipitated a quick and early struggle along
this historic pathway by goading the Indians into a murderous attack
upon the Watauga settlement. The Cherokees who had sold the Transylvania
Company its lands, were the most easily incited to war, and fifty
packhorse loads of ammunition scattered through their towns in those
deep mountain valleys where the two Carolinas and Georgia meet,
determined an outburst in July, 1776. Straight north from them lay the
rude beginnings of civilization on the headwaters of the Tennessee, and
further "in" was the frontier line of Virginia. The headquarters of the
Watauga settlement may be said to have been Fort Watauga, commanded by
the heroes Robertson and Sevier; here Boone had made the treaty with the
Cherokees for Richard Henderson, a trifle over a year ago. Eaton's, Evan
Shelby's, John Shelby's, Campbell's, and the Wommack forts were the
important way stations on this path from Virginia to Kentucky. Two
Indian parties larger than the others made for Fort Watauga and Eaton's
Station, and the defenders of the latter post, learning from their
scouts that a formidable array under the notorious Dragging Canoe was
coming, resolved to give them a hot, unexpected welcome. Accordingly, on
the morning of July twentieth nearly two hundred brown forms could have
been seen stealing away from the fort in two thin lines half lost in the
fog toward the open land known as "the Flats" near the "Long Island" of
the Holston. In the march an advance party of a score of savages was met
and put to flight. No other signs of the enemy could be discovered and
the men started back to their fort at the end of the day.

Dragging Canoe, not less audacious than his foes, awaited his time, and
when the whites were marching homeward, came down upon them, his savages
forming a wedge-shaped line of battle. Instantly the borderers fell back
to the right and left, and with a desperate quietness awaited the
onslaught. The Indian plan of rushing the whites off their feet by an
overwhelming charge failed; the borderers settled deeper into the
ground and met the rush and dashed the savage line into fragments. One
charge--and all was over. There was no recovering from this form of
attack for untrained soldiery, and the assaulting band instantly broke
and fled. This battle of Long Island Flats was the first of the series
of victories for the Watauga pioneers; its importance can hardly be
measured today.

Its best fruit was that it brought other victories to the encouraged
Wataugans. On the same day the other Indian horde invested and assailed
Fort Watauga at dawn. Only about two score men were at home to defend a
large number of women and children, but they were fully equal to the
emergency and with a frightful burst of fire drove back the line of
savages which could just be seen advancing at that hour when Indians
invariably made their attacks--the early dawn. Robertson was senior
officer in command, and Sevier his brave assistant. The latter, having
learned of the Indian uprising, characteristically wrote a message to
the people far away on the Virginia border to look well to their
homes--never even asking that assistance be sent to the much more feeble
and vastly more endangered Watauga settlement on the Kentucky road.

Elsewhere the border warfare was being waged with varying fortune; a
small band of Georgian frontiersmen invaded the Cherokee country[20*] in
the hope of capturing a notorious British agent, Cameron; it suffered
heavily through the faithlessness of the Cherokees. The whole southern
frontier was aroused, and plans for dashes into the Cherokee country
were made but could not be forwarded simultaneously. Yet Cameron and his
Tories and Indians acted in unison and brought sudden desolation into
South Carolina. The force of the blow was broken by the brave Colonel
Andrew Williamson, who, gathering over a thousand volunteers near the
end of July began the first important invasion of the Cherokee country.
Near Eseneka, the Cherokee town, the Carolinians found Cameron and won a
costly victory. After some internal dissensions the little army got on
its mettle and went steadily forward to wipe out the lower Cherokee
towns, which was completely accomplished by the middle of August.
Scarcity of ammunition, only, kept Williamson from attacking the middle
towns.

This task fell to the lot of the second expedition into the Cherokee
country. This was a joint campaign waged by North and South Carolina,
and Virginia, each to furnish two thousand men. The North Carolinians
under Rutherford were earliest in the field. This officer with
twenty-four hundred men left the head of the Catawba and opened
"Rutherford's Trace" leading to Swananoa Gap in the Blue Ridge and on to
the middle Cherokee towns by way of Warrior's Ford of French Broad and
Mount Cowee. The middle towns were destroyed, and, uniting with
Williamson, the two bodies of men swept over the Cherokee valley towns
until "all the Cherokee settlements west of the Appalachians had been
destroyed from the face of the earth, neither crops nor cattle being
left."

While the Carolinians had been sweeping into the lower Cherokee country,
the Virginia troops had been assembling at the Long Island of the
Holston under their leader Colonel William Christian. Their campaign
against the Overhill towns was slowly formed here on the little westward
pathway, and it was not until the first of October that all the
contributions of men and arms from the settlements between Fort Watauga
and the Virginia frontier were received. The advance, by way of Big
Island of the Holston, was slow but determined--each encampment being
made absolutely secure against surprise. The Indians, learning of the
strength of Christian's army, knew better than to resist. They retired
without a struggle and the borderers reached the heart of the Overhill
country on the fifth day of November. Here they ravaged, burned, and
razed to their hearts' content, until a deputation imploring peace came
from the broken tribes. In this action old Dragging Canoe would have no
part but stole away with a few followers toward the Chickamauga.
Christian agreed to a treaty which definitely marked out the boundary
line between the Indians and the whites, and then returned home leaving
a garrison near the Kentucky path by the Holston. In the words of
Roosevelt, who of all writers has done this campaign most justice: "The
Watauga people and the westerners generally were the real gainers by the
war. Had the Watauga settlements been destroyed, they would no longer
have covered the Wilderness Road to Kentucky; and so Kentucky must
perforce have been abandoned. But the followers of Robertson and Sevier
stood stoutly for their homes; not one of them fled over the mountains.
The Cherokees had been so roughly handled that for several years they
did not again go to war as a body; and this not only gave the settlers a
breathing time, but also enabled them to make themselves so strong that
when the struggle was renewed they could easily hold their own. The war
was thus another and important link in the chain of events by which the
west was won; and had any link in the chain snapped during these early
years, the peace of 1783 would probably have seen the trans-Alleghany
country in the hands of a non-American power." If the holding of this
pathway was of such moment the value of the pathway is plainly
understood.

Turning now to the end of Boone's Road, it will be necessary to review
briefly the Revolutionary War in the "far" West; though in many of the
campaigns the road itself played no part, in a large and genuine sense
it was the pilgrims of Boone's Road who fought the most important
battles of the Revolution in the West.

Early in the struggle in the West, far-sighted ones saw signs of the
growing despicable alliance of the savages to British interests; and
before the bloody year of 1778 opened, it was only a question of how
much England wanted of the savage allies who were crowded about their
forts along the lakes. It is a terrible blot on the history of British
rule in America, that when driven to face the same situation, English
officers in the West used every means of retaliation for the use of
which they so roundly condemned French officials a quarter of a century
before. American officers employed Indians as guides and scouts, and
were guilty of provoking inter-tribal war; but they did not pay Indians
for bringing in British scalps, or praise them for their murderous
successes and equip them for further service. As a brave American
officer said, "Let this reproach remain on them"--and the people of the
West will never forget the reproach, nor forgive! They remember, and
always will remember, the burning words of Washington written more than
ten years after the close of the Revolution: "All the difficulties we
encounter with the Indians, their hostilities, the murder of helpless
women and children along all our frontiers, results from the conduct of
the agents of Great Britain in this country." There are today, in
hundreds of homes of descendants of the pioneers in Kentucky, memories
of the inhuman barbarities of British officers during the Revolution;
these will never be forgotten, and will never fail to prejudice
generations yet unborn. The reproach will remain on them.

At the outbreak of the war, chiefs of the Indian nations were invited to
Pittsburg, where the nature of the struggle was explained to them in the
following parable:

"Suppose a father had a little son whom he loved and indulged while
young, but growing up to be a youth, began to think of having some help
from him; and making up a small pack, he bid him carry it for him. The
boy cheerfully takes this pack up, following his father with it. The
father finding the boy willing and obedient, continues in this way; and
as the boy grows stronger, so the father makes the pack in proportion
larger; yet as long as the boy is able to carry the pack, he does so
without grumbling. At length, however, the boy having arrived at
manhood, while the father is making up the pack for him, in comes a
person of an evil disposition, and, learning who was to be the carrier
of the pack, advises the father to make it heavier, for surely the son
is able to carry a larger pack. The father, listening rather to the bad
adviser than consulting his own judgment and the feelings of tenderness,
follows the advice of the hard-hearted adviser, and makes up a heavy
load for his son to carry. The son, now grown up, examining the weight
of the load he is to carry, addresses the father in these words: 'Dear
Father, this pack is too heavy for me to carry, do pray lighten it; I
am willing to do what I can, but am unable to carry this load.' The
father's heart having by this time become hardened, and the bad adviser
calling to him, 'Whip him if he disobeys,' and he refusing to carry the
pack, the father orders his son to take up the pack and carry it off or
he will whip him, and already takes up a stick to beat him. 'So,' says
the son, 'am I to be served thus for not doing what I am unable to do?
Well, if entreaties avail nothing with you, Father, and it is to be
decided by blows, whether or not I am able to carry a pack so heavy,
then I have no other choice left me, but that of resisting your
unreasonable demand by my strength, and thus by striking each other
learn who is the strongest.'"

The Indians were urged to become neutral in the struggle that was
opening. Impossible as such a course would have been to men who loved
war better than peace, certain tribes promised to maintain neutrality.
In a few months, however, most of the nations were in open or secret
alliance with British officers. Only the better element of the Delaware
nation, led by Captain White Eyes, became attached to the American
cause. England was always handicapped in her use of the American Indian,
because of the want of men who could successfully exert control over
him. Even when the forts of the French in the West passed into British
possession, Frenchmen were retained in control, since no Englishman
could so well rule the savages who made the forts their rendezvous. The
beginning of the successful employment of the Indians against the
growing Virginian empire south of the Ohio, and against the multiplying
cabins and forts of the Long Knives, may loosely be said to have begun
in the spring of 1778 when three northern renegades, Simon Girty,
Matthew Elliott, and Alexander McKee, eluded the continental General
Hand at Pittsburg and took service under Lieutenant-governor Hamilton at
Detroit. Bred to border warfare, and well known among the Indians from
the Susquehanna to the Missouri, these three men were the "most
effective tools for the purposes of border warfare" that the British
could have secured. Hamilton immediately began to plan the invasion of
Pennsylvania and the conquest of Pittsburg. The campaign was condemned
by his superiors in the East, and was forgotten by its originator--when
the news of a bold invasion of his own territory by a Virginian army
suddenly reached his ears.

The Transylvania Company came silently but suddenly to an end when the
Kentuckians elected George Rogers Clark and Gabriel John Jones members
of the Virginian assembly, for the assembly erected the county of
Kentucky out of the land purchased by Henderson at Fort Watauga in 1775.
Upon bringing this about, Clark, a native of Virginia and a hero of
Dunmore's War, returned to Kentucky nourishing greater plans. With clear
eyes he saw that the increasing affiliation of Indian and British
interests meant that England, even though she might be unsuccessful in
the East, could keep up an interminable and disastrous warfare "along
the rear of the colonies," as long as she held forts on the northern
edge of the Black Forest. Clark sent spies northward, who gained
information confirming his suspicions; and then he hurried eastward,
with his bold plan of conquering the "strongholds of British and Indian
barbarity"--Kaskaskia, Vincennes, and Detroit.

He came at a fortunate time. The colonies were rejoicing over the first
great victory of the early war, Saratoga. Hope, everywhere, was high.
From Patrick Henry, Governor of Virginia, Clark received two orders, one
of which was to attack the British post Kaskaskia. He at once set out
for Pittsburg to raise, in the West (where both Dunmore and Lewis raised
their armies), troops for the most brilliant military achievement in
western history. Descending the Ohio to Kentucky, where he received
reënforcements, Clark marched silently through the forests--with one
hundred and thirty-five chosen men--to Kaskaskia, which he took in utter
surprise July 4, 1778. "Keep on with your merriment," he said to
revelers whom he surprised at a dance, "but remember you dance under
Virginia, not Great Britain." Clark brought the news of the alliance
recently made between France and the United States into the Illinois
country and used it with telling effect. A French priest at Vincennes
raised a Virginian flag over that fort, telling the inhabitants and the
Indians that their "French Father had come to life." In October Virginia
incorporated the "County of Illinois" within her western empire--the
first portion of the land north of the Ohio River to come under the
administration of one of the states of the Union.

Contemporaneously with Clark's stirring conquest, an expedition was
raised at Pittsburg to march against the Indians in the neighborhood of
the British fort at Sandusky--possibly to counteract the rumored attempt
to invade Pennsylvania, by Hamilton at Detroit. Troops and supplies were
to be assembled at Fort Pitt, where the famous route of Bouquet was to
be followed toward the lakes. The expedition was put in charge of
General Lachlan McIntosh. Distressing delays made the half-hearted
Indians who were to guide the army, chafe; and McIntosh started before
his stores arrived, fearing that longer delay would alienate his
friendly Indians, among whom was the Delaware, White Eyes, now turned
from a neutral course. At the mouth of the Beaver River McIntosh built
the fort which bears his name--the first fort built by the Americans on
the northern side of the Ohio. Advancing westward over Bouquet's
tri-trail track with twelve hundred men, he reached the Muskingum
(Tuscarawas) River in fourteen days, arriving November 19, 1778, where
he erected Fort Laurens.

But Lieutenant-governor Hamilton, learning of Clark's seizure of
Kaskaskia and the treachery of the fickle inhabitants of Vincennes, set
about to reconquer Illinois. Departing from Detroit on a beautiful
October day, the expedition descended the Detroit River and entered the
Maumee. The weather changed and it was seventy-one days before the
American Captain Helm at Vincennes surrendered his wretched fort and
became a prisoner of war. Hamilton was unable to push on to Kaskaskia
because of the lack of provisions, and sat down to watch the winter out
where he was. Thus the spectacular year 1778 closed--Clark at
Kaskaskia, watching his antagonist feasting at Vincennes; McIntosh's
little guard at Fort Laurens undergoing continual harassing and siege.
In the East the evacuation of Philadelphia, the battle of Monmouth, and
the terrible Wyoming massacre were the events of the year.

The year 1779 was to see as brilliant an achievement in the West, as the
East was to see in the capture of Stony Point. This was the recapture of
Vincennes by Clark. Joined by an experienced adventurer, Colonel Francis
Vigo, formerly of the Spanish service, Clark was persuaded that he must
capture Hamilton or Hamilton would capture him. Accordingly, on the
fifth of February, Clark set out for Vincennes with one hundred and
seventy trusty men. In twelve days they reached the Embarras River,
which was crossed on the twenty-first with great bravery, the men wading
in water to their shoulders. On the twenty-fifth, Hamilton, the most
surprised man in the world, was compelled to surrender. Within two weeks
he was on his way to Virginia; where, being found guilty of buying
Virginian scalps from the Indians, he was imprisoned, but was exchanged
the year following.

In July, while returning from New Orleans with supplies; Colonel Rogers
and his party of Kentuckians were overwhelmed by Indians, under Girty
and Elliott, on the Ohio River. In a terrible running battle sixty
Kentuckians were killed. The sad news spread quickly through Kentucky
and a thousand tongues called loudly for revenge. In response Major
Bowman led three hundred volunteers up the Scioto Valley and attacked
the Shawanese capital. There was bungling somewhere and a retreat was
ordered before victory was achieved.

During this summer the conqueror of Illinois expected to complete his
triumph by the capture of Detroit. A messenger from Thomas Jefferson,
Governor of Virginia, brought tidings that troops for this expedition
would be forthcoming from Virginia and Kentucky, and rendezvous at
Vincennes in July. When the time came, Clark found only a few soldiers
from Kentucky and none at all from Virginia. The Detroit expedition
fell through because of Virginia's poverty in money and in men; though
artillery, ammunition, and tools had been secured for the campaign from
Fort Pitt, at Washington's command. But with masterly foresight Governor
Jefferson secured the establishment of a fort on the Mississippi River
in the Illinois country. During this summer the little garrison which
General McIntosh left buried in the Black Forest at Fort Laurens fled
back over the trail to Pittsburg. Nowhere north of the Ohio were the
scenes frequently enacted in Kentucky reproduced so vividly as at little
Fort Laurens, on the upper Muskingum. At one time fourteen of the
garrison were decoyed and slaughtered. At another time an army numbering
seven hundred warriors invested the little half-forgotten fortress and
its intrepid defenders. A slight embankment may be seen today near
Bolivar, Ohio, which marks one side of the first fort erected in what is
now Ohio, those near the lake shore excepted. Thus closed the year 1779:
Clark again in possession of Vincennes, as well as Kaskaskia and
Cahokia, but disappointed in the failure of the Detroit expedition;
Hamilton languishing in a Virginia dungeon, twelve hundred miles from
his capital--Fort Detroit; Fort Laurens abandoned, and the Kentucky
country covered with gloom over Rogers's terrible loss and Bowman's
inglorious retreat from the valley of the Scioto. On the other hand, the
East was glorying in Mad Anthony Wayne's capture of Stony Point,
Sullivan's rebuke to the Indians, and Paul Jones's electrifying victory
on the sea.

In 1780 four expeditions set forth, all of them singular in character,
and noteworthy. The year before, 1779, Spain had declared war upon
England. The new commander at Detroit took immediate occasion to regain
control of the Mississippi by attacking the Spanish town of St. Louis.
This expedition, under Captain Sinclair, descended the Mississippi from
Prairie du Chien. The attack was not successful, but six whites were
killed and eighteen taken prisoner.

At the time of Bowman's expedition against the Shawanese, in the
preceding year a British officer, Colonel Bird, had assembled a
noteworthy array at Sandusky preparatory to the invasion of Kentucky.
News of the Kentucky raid up the Scioto Valley set Bird's Indians to
"cooking and counselling" again, instead of acting. This year Bird's
invasion materialized, and the fate of the Kentucky settlements trembled
in the balance. The invading army of six hundred Indians and Canadians
was armed with two pieces of artillery. There is little doubt that this
army could have battered down every "station" in Kentucky and swept
victoriously through the new settlements. Ruddles's station on the
Licking was first menaced, and surrendered quickly. Martin's fort also
capitulated. But here Bird paused in his conquest and withdrew
northward, the barbarity of the Indian allies, for once at least,
shocking a British commander. The real secret of the abrupt retreat lay
no doubt in the fact that the increasing immigration had brought such
vast numbers of people into Kentucky that Bird dared not penetrate
further into the land for fear of a surprise. The gross carelessness of
the newly arrived inhabitants, in not taking the precaution to build
proper defenses against the Indians, undoubtedly appeared to the British
commander as a sign of strength and fortitude which he did not have the
courage to put to the test. As a matter of fact, he could probably have
annihilated every settlement between the Ohio River and Cumberland Gap.

In retaliation Kentucky sent an immense army north of the Ohio, a
thousand men volunteering under Clark, the hero of Vincennes. A large
Indian army was routed near the Shawanese town Pickaway. Many towns with
standing crops were burned. A similar expedition from Pittsburg under
General Brodhead burned crops and villages on the upper Muskingum.

In return for the attack on St. Louis, the Spanish commander at that
point sent an expedition against the deserted British post of St.
Joseph. Upon declaring war against England in the previous year, Spain
had occupied Natchez, Baton Rouge, and Mobile, which, with St. Louis,
gave her command of the Mississippi. But his Catholic Majesty was
building other Spanish castles in America. He desired the conquest of
the British northwest, to offset the British capture of Gibraltar. This
"capture" of St. Joseph led to an amusing but ominous claim on the part
of Spain at the Treaty of Paris: when, with it for a pretext, the
Spanish Crown claimed all lands west of a line drawn from St. Joseph
southward through what is now Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia,
Alabama, and Mississippi. The Mississippi River boundary was, however,
stoutly contended for and obtained by the American commissioners.

In this year the first "gunboat" to ply western waters was built under
direction of Brigadier-general Clark. It was a galley armed with light
artillery. This queer-looking craft soon fell into disuse, though it
became a terror to the Indians who continually infested the lower Ohio.
It was relished little better by the militia, who disliked service on
water. But it stands as a typical illustration of the enterprise and
devotion of the "Father of Kentucky" to the cause for which he had done
so much.

The year following, 1781, saw the termination of the Revolution in the
East, when Cornwallis's army marched down the files of French and
American troops at Yorktown to the melancholy tune "The World's Turned
Upside Down." The Treaty of Paris was not signed until 1783, and in the
meantime the bloodiest year of all the war in the West, 1782, was adding
its horrors to all that had gone before. While the East was rejoicing,
the central West saw the terrible massacre of Gnadenhutten--the more
terrible because committed by white men themselves.

In May, 1782, the atrocities of the savages (encouraged by the British)
along the Pennsylvanian and Virginian border were becoming unbearable,
and an expedition was raised in the Monongahela country to penetrate to
the Indian-infested country on the Sandusky River. Volunteers, four
hundred in number, all mounted, rendezvoused at the Ohio near Mingo
Bottom; they elected as commander Colonel William Crawford, an
experienced officer of the Revolutionary War, following Washington
faithfully through the hard Long Island and Delaware campaigns. Crawford
struck straight through the forests, even avoiding Indian trails, at
first, in the hope of taking his foe utterly by surprise. But his wily
foe completely outwitted him and the Indians and British knew well each
day's progress. The battle was fought in a prairie land near the
Sandusky River in what is now Crawford County, Ohio, and though not a
victory for either side, an American retreat was ordered during the
night following. Colonel Crawford was captured, among others, and
suffered a terrible death at the stake, perhaps the saddest single
atrocity committed by the redman in western history. This gray-haired
veteran of the Revolution gave his life to appease the Indians for a
massacre of Christian Indians perpetrated by savage borderers from the
Monongahela country the year previous.

Kentucky had witnessed minor activities of the savages during the
spring. In August a grand Indian army assembled on the lower Scioto for
the purpose of invading Kentucky. The assembly was harangued by Simon
Girty, and moved southward and invaded Bryant's Station, one of the
strongest forts in Kentucky. After a terrible day, during which
re-enforcements kept arriving, only to be compelled to fight their way
into the fort or flee, Girty attempted to secure capitulation.
Outwitted, the renegade resorted to a stratagem, as cunningly devised as
it was terribly successful. In the night the entire Indian army vanished
as if panic-stricken. Meat was left upon the spits. Garments lay strewn
about the encampment and along the route of the fugitive army. The more
experienced of the border army, which was soon in full cry on the trail,
scented the deception; but the headstrong hurried onward in hope of
revenge. At the crossing of the Licking, near the lower Blue Licks, the
Indian ambush received the witless pursuers with a frightful burst of
flame, and the battle of Blue Licks became a running fire, a headlong
rout and massacre.

A thousand men joined Clark for a retaliatory invasion of the north, and
the usual destruction of villages and crops was accomplished. This may
be considered the last military event in the Revolutionary War in the
West.




CHAPTER V

AT THE END OF BOONE'S ROAD


On the nineteenth of April, 1775, the rumble of the running fire at
Lexington and Concord told that the farmers of New England had at last
precipitated the struggle which had been impending for a full
generation. It was a roar that, truly, was "heard round the world."

One day later, April 20, 1775, Colonel Henderson and his fellow-pioneers
of the Transylvania Company reached Boonesborough; there they were
joyfully received by a running fire of five and twenty muskets
discharged by Boone's vanguard, which had preceded them to cut the road.
If the musket-shot behind the New England stone walls was heard round
the world, the rattle of that score of muskets in distant Kentucky was
heard around a continent. The former uttered a hoarse defiance to
tyrants--a cry to God for liberty; what was the faint roar which echoed
back a thousand mountain miles from Kentucky but an answer to that cry?
an assurance that "to him that hath shall be given?" There is something
divinely significant to me in the coincidence of the opening shock of
the Revolution, and the arrival in Kentucky of the first considerable
body of determined, reputable men.

The story of the Revolutionary War in the West has been told in
preceding pages, as the merest record of fact. It is unnecessary to
state that it was the most important conflict ever waged there, and it
is equally trite to observe that the struggle centered around Kentucky.
Boone's Road had made possible the sudden movement of population
westward, and this pioneer host immediately drew upon itself the enemies
that otherwise would have scourged the frontiers of New York,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Carolina. The first and principal
portion of the Kentucky pioneers--those who fought the Revolutionary
battles--entered Kentucky by the Cumberland Gap route. James Lane Allen
writes: "That area [Kentucky] has somewhat the shape of an enormous
flat foot, with a disjointed big toe, a roughly hacked-off ankle, and a
missing heel. The sole of this huge foot rests solidly on Tennessee, the
Ohio River trickles across the ankle and over the top, the big toe is
washed entirely off by the Tennessee River, and the long-missing heel is
to be found in Virginia, never having been ceded by that State. Between
the Kentucky foot and the Virginia heel is piled up this immense, bony,
grisly mass of the Cumberland Mountain, extending some three hundred
miles northeast and southwest. It was through this heel that Kentucky
had to be peopled. The thin, half-starved, weary line of pioneer
civilizers had to penetrate it, and climb this obstructing mountain
wall, as a line of traveling ants might climb the wall of a castle. In
this case only the strongest of the ants--the strongest in body, the
strongest in will--succeeded in getting over and establishing their
colony in the country far beyond. Luckily there was an enormous
depression in the wall, or they might never have scaled it. During about
half a century this depression was the difficult, exhausting
entrance-point through which the State received the largest part of its
people, the furniture of their homes, and the implements of their
civilization; so that from the very outset that people represented the
most striking instance of a survival of the fittest that may be observed
in the founding of any American commonwealth. The feeblest of the ants
could not climb the wall; the idlest of them would not."[21] Mr. Speed
agrees wholly in this opinion: "The settlers came in ... increasing
numbers.... A very large proportion came over the Wilderness Road."[22]
In the early days river travel was not practicable. During the
Revolutionary War and for some time thereafter travel down the Ohio
River was dangerous, both because of the hostility of the savages and
because of the condition of the river. In earlier days the journey from
the Ohio into the populated parts of Kentucky was a great hardship. The
story of one who emigrated to Kentucky by way of the Ohio shows plainly
why many preferred the longer land route by way of Cumberland Gap. The
following is from an autobiographical statement made by Spencer Record,
preserved by the Wisconsin Historical Society:

"About the Twentieth of November (1783) we embarked on the Monongahela
in our boat, in company with Kiser, I having with me four head of horses
and some cattle. We landed at the mouth of Limestone Creek, but there
was then, no settlement there. We made search for a road, but found
none. There was indeed a buffalo road, that crossed Limestone Creek a
few miles above its mouth, and passing May's lick about twelve miles
from Limestone, went on to the Lower Blue Lick on Licking river, and
thence to Bryant's station: but as we knew nothing of it, we went on,
and landed at the mouth of Licking river, on the twenty ninth of the
month.

"The next day, we loaded periogue, and a canoe, and set off up Licking,
sometimes wading and pulling our periogue and canoe over the ripples.
After working hard for four days, we landed, hid our property (which
was whiskey and our farming utensils) in the woods, and returned to the
Ohio, which by this time had taken a rapid rise and backed up Licking,
so that we took Kiser's boat up, as far as we had taken our property and
unloaded her. We left on the bank of Licking, a new wagon and some
kettles. Leaving our property to help Kiser, we packed up and set off up
Licking, and travelled some days; but making poor progress, and snow
beginning to fall, with no cane in that part of the country, for our
horses and cattle, we left Kiser and set off to hunt for cane. He sent
his stock with us, in care of Henry Fry, who had come down in his boat
with cattle for his father.

"When we came to the fork of Licking we found a wagon road cut out, that
led up the South fork. This road had been cut by Colonel Bird, a British
officer, who had ascended Licking in keel boats, with six hundred
Canadians and Indians. They were several days in cutting out this road
which led to Riddle's fort, which stood on the east side of Licking,
three miles below the junction of Hinkston's and Stoner's fork, yet our
people knew nothing of it, till they were summoned to surrender.... We
took the road and went on, the snow being about half leg deep. Early in
the morning, about three miles from Riddle's fort, we came to three
families encamped. They had landed at Limestone but finding no road,
they wandered through the woods, crossed Licking, and happening to find
the road, took it.... We went on to the fort, where we found plenty of
cane. The next morning, John Finch and myself set off to try to find
Lexington, and left the horses and cattle ... as there was no road, we
took up Will creek, and towards the head of it we met some hunters, who
lived on the south side of Kentucky river who gave us directions how to
find a hunting trace, that led to Bryant's station.... We went on, found
the trace, and arrived at Bryant's station."[23]

Adding to the difficulties of land travel the dangers of the river tide,
the difficulty of securing boats, and their great cost, it is little
wonder that emigrants from Virginia preferred the long but better-known
land route, through Powell's Valley and Cumberland Gap to the Braddock
Road and the Ohio River. At a later date, however, the difficulties of
river passage were materially decreased and the Ohio became the great
outward emigrant route.

But for the return traffic from Kentucky to Virginia, there was no
comparison between the ease of the land route and the water route. Mr.
Speed affirms that the road through Cumberland Gap "was the only
practicable route for all return travel."[24] Of course for a long
period there were no exports from Kentucky, as hardly enough could be
raised to feed the multitude of immigrants; but when at last Kentucky
strode to the front with its great harvests of wheat and tobacco, the
Mississippi and Ohio ports received them.

The East received comparatively little benefit, in a commercial way,
from Boone's Road; but in the earliest days that slight track furnished
a moral support that can hardly be exaggerated. The vast population that
surged westward over it was a mighty barrier which protected the rear of
the colonies from the savages, until savage warfare was at an end.
Though the frontiers of New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia suffered
greatly during the Revolution, it was Kentucky that was the thorn in the
side of the British; Kentucky drew the fire of both British and Indians
which otherwise would have desolated the rear of the eastern colonies,
and necessitated a greater number of men than could possibly have been
maintained there. It was not at Fort Pitt that the British were
constantly striking, but at the Kentucky "stations;" it was not up the
Allegheny or Monongahela that Colonel Burd pushed his keel boats, but up
the Licking. This fact is splendidly urged by Col. John Floyd, in a
letter to the governor of Virginia written on the sixth of October,
1781, in a plea for assistance in maintaining the Kentucky settlements:

"... A great deal more might be said concerning the dangerous situation
of these counties, but I have not been informed whether Government think
it absolutely necessary for the advantage of the community at large to
defend this country [Kentucky] at so considerable expense as must be
incurred thereby; and I therefore beg leave to offer your Excellency one
or two reasons why it may be of advantage to defend the Kentucky
country. It is now beyond a doubt, that the attention of at last [least]
6000 savage warriors is fixed on this spot, and who will not disturb any
other part of the Continent as long as we maintain our ground. But, on
the contrary, as soon as this country is laid waste, they will
immediately fall upon the inhabitants of Washington, Montgomery,
Greenbriar, &c--in short, from South Carolina to Pennsylvania. I believe
all the counties on the west side of the Blue Ridge were kept for many
years penned up in forts by the Shawanese, Mingoes, Delawares & a few of
their adherents; if so what will be the consequence when at least
fifteen powerful Nations are united and combined with those above
mentioned against about twelve hundred militia dispersed over three
very extensive counties. Those nations have absolutely been kept off
your back settlements by the inhabitants of Kentucky. Two or three
thousand men in this country would be sufficient to defend it, and
effectually secure the back settlements on New River & its waters, as
well as those high up James River & Roanoake."[25]

In addition to conferring the inestimable advantage of defending the
frontiers of the colonies, the early settlement and the holding of
Kentucky insured American possession of the Middle West; this meant
everything to the East--for the steady, logical expansion of the nation
was the one hope of the country when independence was secured. Upon the
Americanization of the Mississippi Valley depended the safety of the
eastern colonies, and their commercial and political welfare. It meant
very much to the East that a strong colony was holding its own on the
Ohio and Mississippi during the hours when the Revolutionary struggle
was in progress; and it meant even more to the East that, upon the
conclusion of that struggle, thousands whose future seemed as black as
the forests of the West could immediately emigrate thither and begin
life anew. But for the Virginians and Kentuckians along the Ohio it is
almost certain that Great Britain would have divided the eastern half of
this continent with the triumphant revolutionists. For the few posts
along the lakes that she did hold there was a spirited wrangle for
twenty years, until they were at last handed over to the United States.
Boone did not blaze his road one day too soon, and the hand of divine
Providence is not shown more plainly in our national history than by the
critical timeliness with which these pioneers were ushered into the
meadow lands of Ken-ta-kee. The onslaughts of Shawanese and Wyandot did
not overwhelm them; nor were they daunted by the plotting of desperate
British officers, who spread ruin and desolation along the flank and
rear of the fighting colonies.

Again, this earliest population in the immediate valley of the
Mississippi had a powerful influence on the attitude of the United
States toward the powers that held the Mississippi. Had it not been for
a Kentucky in embryo in 1775-82, it is unquestionable that the confused
story of the possession of that great river valley would have been worse
confounded. The whirl of politics in Kentucky during the four decades
after the Revolutionary War daunts even the student of modern Kentucky
politics; and of one thing we may rest assured--had the State possessed
a little less of the sober sense that came from Virginia through
Cumberland Gap, it is certain the story of those wild days would not be
as readable to modern Kentuckians as it is. It was more than fortunate
for the young Republic that at the close of the Revolution there was a
goodly population of expatriated Virginians and North Carolinians on the
Mississippi, ready to press its claims there.

Thus we may briefly suggest the benefits which the older colonies
received from the earliest settlers in Kentucky--and but for Boone's
Road made by the Transylvania Company, it is exceedingly doubtful, as
Boone wrote, whether the settlement of Kentucky would have been
successfully inaugurated as early as 1774. At any rate Boone's Road
brought into Kentucky thousands of pioneers who probably would have
refused to move westward by the Ohio River route.

As for the benefit Kentucky itself received from Boone's Road, that is
self-evident. Taking everything into consideration, no distinct movement
of population in America, before or since, can compare in magnitude with
the burst of immigration through Cumberland Gap between 1775 and 1790.
Never on this continent was a population of seventy thousand people
located, within fifteen years of the day the first cabins were erected,
at an equal distance from the existing frontier line. It is difficult to
frame the facts of this remarkable phenomenon in language that will
convey the full meaning. If the brave pioneers from Connecticut who
founded the Northwest Territory at Marietta, Ohio, in 1788, had gone on
to Kentucky, they would have found themselves, within twelve years, in
as populous a state as that they left in New England. The Stanwix Treaty
and Boone's Road largely answer the question why Kentucky contained
more than one-half as many inhabitants as Massachusetts, twenty-five
years after its first settlement was made; and why it was admitted into
the Union four years before Tennessee, ten years before Ohio,
twenty-four years before Indiana, twenty-six years before Illinois
(bounded by the Ohio and Mississippi and Lake Michigan), and
twenty-eight years before Maine. Between 1790 and 1800 the population of
Kentucky jumped from 70,000 to 220,000, only one-third less than proud
Maryland, and five times that of Ohio. In the census of 1790 Kentucky
stood fourteenth in a grouping of sixteen states and territories, while
in 1800 it stood ninth. In 1790 it exceeded the population of Rhode
Island, Delaware and Tennessee. In 1800 it exceeded New Jersey, New
Hampshire, Georgia, Vermont, Maine, Tennessee, Rhode Island, and
Delaware. In this year it had one hundred and sixty thousand more
inhabitants than Indiana Territory, Mississippi Territory, and Ohio
Territory combined. In the decade mentioned, New York State increased in
population two hundred and fifty thousand; far-away Kentucky increased
one hundred and forty-seven thousand.

But the West as a whole was benefited by Boone's Road. The part played
by this earliest population of Kentucky in the development of the
contiguous states--Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri--has never been
emphasized sufficiently. No Ohio historian has given sufficient
attention to the part played by Kentuckians in the conquest of that area
of territory. The struggle between the Kentuckians and the Ohio Indians
has been outlined. The former fought for and saved to the Union the
great territory south of the Ohio; and then left their smoking cabins
and threw themselves ever and anon across the Ohio, upon the Indian
settlements between that river and the Great Lakes. Where is even the
Kentucky historian who has done his state justice in telling the story
of Kentucky's conquest of Ohio and Indiana? Of the brilliant operations
of Clark in Illinois we know very much, and the part played by the
Kentuckians on the Mississippi and Illinois has frequently been made
plain. But a singular misconception of the nature of Indian warfare has
robbed the heroes of old Kentucky of much honor due them. Judged by
ordinary military standards, the numerous invasions of Ohio and Indiana
by Kentuckians amounted to little. Such was not the real case, many
times. The Indians could ever retreat helter-skelter into the forests,
avoiding more than a mere skirmish with the advancing pioneers. But they
could not take their crops--and the destruction of one slight maize crop
meant more to the invading army than the killing of many savages. The
killing of the Indians did nothing but aggravate hostilities and long
delay the end of the conflict. On the other hand, slaying redskins
became the passion of the whites, and it is probable that many of their
expeditions seemed failures if blood was not spilt. But their very
presence in the Indian land and the destruction of the grain fields was
more to their purpose, could they only have realized it. The Indians
were then compelled to live largely on game, and as this grew more
scarce each year the simple problem of obtaining subsistence became
serious. The hunters were compelled to go further and further into the
forest, and the tribes followed them. By doing nothing more than burning
the harvest fields and ruining the important springs, the whites were
slowly but surely conquering the trans-Ohio country.[26] By such a
process one river valley after another was deserted, until, when the
first legalized settlement was made in Ohio--at Marietta, in 1788--the
Muskingum, Scioto and Miami valleys were practically deserted by
redskins. Little as the Indians relished the new settlement at Marietta,
they paid practically no attention to it but kept their eyes on the
populated valleys of Kentucky, where their enemies of so many years'
standing had settled, held their own, and then carried fire and sword
northward. In October 1788 Governor Arthur St. Clair wrote the Hon. Mr.
Brown of Danville, Kentucky, to give warning of the Indian war that
seemed imminent; "The stroke, if it falls at all, will probably fall
upon your country," he wrote.[27] And the Indian War of 1790 was
precipitated because of Indian marauds along the Kentucky border--not
because of attacks upon the settlements along the upper Ohio. The
Kentuckians had played a preëminent part in driving the Indians back to
the head of the Wabash and the mouth of the Maumee, in the two decades
preceding the Indian War which opened in 1790, and during that war they
were to the American armies what the English were to the allies at
Waterloo. Local histories and local historians have created the
impression that Ohio was conquered largely by Ohioans. Nothing could be
more misleading.

Far-reaching as the influence of the little roadway through Cumberland
Gap has been, its actual history is of little interest or importance.
Perhaps none of our ancient roads has done so much for society in
proportion to the attention paid to it. Any adjective ever applied to a
roadway, if it were of a derogatory character, might have been fitly
applied to portions of this old track which played an important part in
giving birth to the first and most important settlement in the West.
During the few important years of its existence Boone's Road was only
what Boone made it--a blazed foot-path westward. It was but the merest
foot-path from 1774 to 1792, while thousands floundered over its
uncertain track to lay the rude foundations of civilization in the land
to which it led. "There are roads that make a man lose faith," writes
Mr. Allen; "It is known that the more pious companies [of pioneers] as
they traveled along, would now and then give up in despair, sit down,
raise a hymn, and have prayers said before they could go farther." There
was probably not a more desperate pioneer road in America than this. The
mountains to be crossed, the rivers and swamps the traveler encountered,
were as difficult to overcome as any on Braddock's Road; and Boone's
Road was very much longer, even if measured from its technical
starting-point--the Watauga settlement.

As early as 1779 the Virginia Assembly took up the subject of a western
highway, and commissioners were appointed to explore the region on both
sides of the mountains, to choose a course for a roadway, clear and
open the route, and render a report upon the advisability of making a
wagon road. Yet no improvement followed. The narrow path--rough,
treacherous, almost impassable--remained the only course. A vivid
description of what a journey over it meant in this year, 1779, has been
left us by Chief-justice Robertson in an address given at Camp Madison,
Franklin County, Kentucky, half a century ago:

"This beneficent enactment [the land law] brought to the country during
the fall and winter of that year an unexampled tide of emigrants, who,
exchanging all the comforts of their native society and homes for
settlements for themselves and their children here, came like pilgrims
to a wilderness to be made secure by their arms and habitable by the
toil of their lives. Through privations incredible and perils thick,
thousands of men, women, and children came in successive caravans,
forming continuous streams of human beings, horses, cattle, and other
domestic animals, all moving onward along a lonely and houseless path to
a wild and cheerless land. Cast your eyes back on that long procession
of missionaries in the cause of civilization; behold the men on foot
with their trusty guns on their shoulders, driving stock and leading
packhorses; and the women, some walking with pails on their heads,
others riding with children in their laps, and other children swung in
baskets on horses, fastened to the tails of others going before; see
them encamped at night expecting to be massacred by Indians; behold them
in the month of December, in that ever memorable season of unprecedented
cold called the 'hard winter,' traveling two or three miles a day,
frequently in danger of being frozen or killed by the falling of horses
on the icy and almost impassable trace, and subsisting on stinted
allowances of stale bread and meat; but now lastly look at them at the
destined fort, perhaps on the eve of merry Christmas, when met by the
hearty welcome of friends who had come before, and cheered by fresh
buffalo meat and parched corn, they rejoice at their deliverance, and
resolve to be contented with their lot.

"This is no vision of the imagination, it is but an imperfect
description of the pilgrimage of my own father and mother, and of many
others who settled in Kentucky in December, 1779."

Not until 1792 was the mountain route improved. "In that year," writes
Mr. Speed, "according to an account-book recently found among the Henry
Innis Papers, by Colonel John Mason Brown ... a scheme was projected for
the clearing and improvement of the Wilderness Road, under the direction
of Colonel John Logan and James Knox. It was a private enterprise
altogether; the subscribers to it are set down in the book as follows:

  Isaac Shelby,            £3  0s
  Robert Breckinridge,      2  8
  George Nicholas,          2  8
  Henry Pawling,            1 10
  John Brown,               2  8
  James Brown,              1 16
  Alexander S. Bullitt,     2  8
  Wm. McDowell,             1 10
  Edward S. Thomas,         1 10
  Joseph Crockett,          1 18
  Wm. King,                   10
  Wm. Montgomery, jr.,      1 10
  John Hawkins,             1 10
  Samuel Woods,             1  4
  Hubbard Taylor,           2  8
  Thomas Todd,              1 10
  Wm. Steele,               1 10
  James Trotter,            1 18
  Joseph Gray,              2  2
  Joshua Hobbs,             1  4
  Robert Todd,              1 10
  Jesse Cravens,            1 10
  David Knox,               1 12
  Thomas Lewis,             1 10
  Samuel Taylor,            1  4
  John McKinney,            1 18
  Nicholas Lewis,           1  4
  Jacob Froman,             3  0
  Richard Young,            1  4
  James Davies,             1 10
  Robert Patterson,         1 10
  Robert Mosby,             1 10
  John Watkins,             1  4
  Matthew Walton,           1 16
  John Jouett,              1 10
  Robert Abel,                12
  John Wilson,                12
  Richard Taylor,           1 10
  Arthur Fox,               1  0
  John Caldwell,              12
  George Thompson,          1  4
  Baker Ewing,
  Abe Buford,               1  8
  Willis Green,             1 10
  Wm. Montgomery, sr.,      1 10
  Morgan Forbes,              18
  Daniel Hudgins,              6
  Samuel Grundy,            1 10
  James Hays,               1 10
  James Edwards,               9
  Wm. Campbell,               12
  David Stevenson,             9
  Hugh Logan,                  6
  Peter Troutman,             12
  Thomas Montgomery,           6
  John Vauhn,                  6
  Elijah Cravens,              6
  Richard Chapman,             6
  James Sutton,                3
  Joseph Lewis,                6
  Wm. Baker,                   6
  Richard Jackman,             6
  Jonathan Forbes,            12
  Isaac Hite,                 12
  John Blane,                 12
  Abraham Hite,               12
  John Caldwell,            1  4
  Peyton Short,             1 10
  George M. Bedinger,         18
  Alex. D. Orr,             1 10
  Philip Caldwell,          1  4
  Cornelius Beatty,         1 16
  Nathaniel Hart,           1  4
  John Grant,               1 10
  Andrew Holmes,            1 16
  Alex. Parker,             1 16
  Robert Barr,              2  8
  James Parker,             1 16
  Thomas Kennedy,           3  0
  Wm. Live,                 1 18
  George Teagarden,           18
  George Muter,             1 10
  James Hughes,             1 10
  Buckner Thruston,         1 10
  John Moylan,              1 10
  Samuel McDowell,          1  4
  James Parberry,           3  0
  Joseph Reed,              2  0
  Wm. Perrett,                 5
  John Robinson,            2  0
  John Wilkins,                4
  Wm. Whilley,       Bacon acct.
  Henry Clark,                 6
  Hardy Rawles,             2  0
  James Young,                12
  John Warren,                 6
  Peter Sidebottom,            6
  John Willey,                 6
  Moses Collier,              12
  Abraham Himberlin,        1  0
  Alex Blane,                 12
  John Jones,                 18
  Levi Todd,                1  0
  Thomas Ball,                12

"Besides these, it appears from a note in the memorandum book there were
other subscribers. Among the Innis papers I have found the following
paper:

'Colonel John Logan and Colonel James Knox, having consented to act as
commissioners to direct and supervise the making and opening a road from
the Crab Orchard to Powell's Valley, provided funds to defray the
necessary expenses shall be procured, we, the subscribers, do therefore
severally engage to pay the sum annexed to our names to the Hon. Harry
Innis and Colonel Levi Todd, or to their order, in trust, to be by them
applied to the payment of the reasonable expenses which the said
commissioners may incur in carrying the above design into effect, also
to the payment of such compensation to the said commissioners for their
services as the said Innis and Todd may deem adequate.'

    June 20, 1792.

  Thos. Barber,              $10
  Wm. Crow,                    5
  Green Dorsey,               18
  John Cochran,                4
  David Gillis,               10
  Wm. Petty,                   1
  John Warren,                10
  Wm. Kenton,                  1
  Philip Bush, jr.,           10
  David Rice,                  1
  John Rochester,             10
  John Rogers,                 1
  Samuel G. Keen,              5
  Padtrick Curran,             1
  John Reedyun,                1
  Daniel Barber,               1
  Philip Yeiser,               3

"The money subscribed was disbursed by Harry Innis. Men were employed as
'road cutters,' as 'surveyors,' to 'carry provisions,' to 'grind corn,'
and 'collect bacon.' The pay was two shillings sixpence per day, and
the work extended over twenty-two days in the summer of 1792."[28]

The Kentucky legislature passed an act in 1793, which provided a guard
for pilgrims on the Wilderness Road; in 1794 an act was passed for the
clearing of the Boonesborough fork of the road, from Rockcastle Creek to
the Kentucky River. In 1795 the legislature passed an act to make the
Wilderness Road a "wagon road" thirty feet wide from near Crab Orchard
to Cumberland Gap. Proposals being advertised for, the aged Daniel Boone
addressed Governor Isaac Shelby the following letter:

  "Sir                                     feburey the 11th 1796

  after my Best Respts to your Excelancy and famyly I wish to inform
  you that I have sum intention of undertaking this New Rode that is
  to be Cut through the Wilderness and I think My Self intiteled to
  the ofer of the Bisness as I first Marked out that Rode in March
  1775 and Never Re'd anything for my trubel and Sepose I am No
  Statesman I am a Woodsman and think My Self as Capable of Marking
  and Cutting that Rode as any other man Sir if you think with Me I
  would thank you to wright mee a Line by the post the first
  oportuneaty and he Will Lodge it at Mr. John Miler son hinkston
  fork as I wish to know Where and When it is to be Laat [let] So
  that I may atend at the time

  I am Deer Sir your very omble sarvent"[29]

Boone probably did not get the contract.[30]

In 1797 five hundred pounds were appropriated for the repair of the road
and erection of toll-gates. The result of this and all subsequent
legislation, to preserve a thoroughfare after its day and reason for
existence had passed, is thus summed up by Mr. Allen: "But despite all
this--despite all that has been done to civilize it since Boone traced
its course in 1790 [1775?], this honored historic thoroughfare remains
today as it was in the beginning, with all its sloughs and sands, its
mud and holes, and jutting ledges of rock and loose bowlders, and twists
and turns, and general total depravity." And yet "it is impossible,"
Mr. Allen continues, "to come upon this road without pausing, or to
write of it without a tribute."

The mountainous portions of Boone's old road are the picturesque as well
as the historic portions. And come what may, this zig-zag pathway
through Powell's Valley and Cumberland Gap can never be effaced--never
forgotten. The footsteps of the tens of thousands who have passed over
it, exhausted though each pilgrim may have been, have left a trace that
a thousand years cannot eradicate. And so long as the print of those
weary feet can be seen in dark Powell's Valley, on Cumberland Gap, and
beside Yellow and Rockcastle Creeks, so long will there be a memorial
left to perpetuate the heroism of the first Kentuckians--and the memory
of what the Middle West owes to Virginia and her neighbors. For when all
is said this track from tide water through Cumberland Gap must remain a
monument to the courage and patriotism of the people of old Virginia and
North Carolina.

Cumberland Gap, "that high-swung gateway through the mountain" stands
as "a landmark of what Nature can do when she wishes to give an
opportunity to the human race in its migrations and discoveries, without
surrendering control of its liberty and its fate." Here passed the
mound-building Indian and the buffalo, marking the first routes from
North to South across the continent. Here later passed the first
flood-tide of white men's immigration. There are few spots on the
continent, it is said, where the traveler of today is brought more
quickly to a pause, overcome equally by the stupendous panorama before
him, and by the memory of the historical associations which will assail
even the most indifferent. Ere you reach the Gap "the idea of it,"
writes Mr. Allen, "dominates the mind. While yet some miles away, it
looms up, 1675 feet in elevation, some half a mile across from crest to
crest, the pinnacle on the left towering to the height of 2500 feet. It
was late in the afternoon when our tired horses began the long, winding,
rocky climb from the valley to the brow of the pass. As we stood in the
passway, amid the deepening shadows of the twilight and the solemn
repose of the mighty landscape, the Gap seemed to be crowded with
two invisible and countless pageants of human life, the one passing
in, the other passing out; and the air grew thick with unheard
utterances--primeval sounds undistinguishable and strange, of creatures
nameless and never seen by man; the wild rush and whoop of retreating
and pursuing tribes; the slow steps of watchful pioneers; the wail of
dying children and the songs of homeless women; the muffled tread of
routed and broken armies--all the sounds of surprise and delight,
victory and defeat, hunger and pain, and weariness and despair, that the
human heart can utter. Here passed the first of the white race who led
the way into the valley of the Cumberland; here passed that small band
of fearless men who gave the Gap its name; here passed the 'Long
Hunters'; here rushed armies of the Civil War; here has passed the wave
of westerly immigration, whose force has spent itself only on the
Pacific slopes; and here in the long future must flow backward and
forward the wealth of the North and the South."




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Johnson's _First Explorations of Kentucky_ (Filson Club
Publications, No. 13), contains the journals of Walker and Gist used in
connection with this chapter.

[2] Johnson's _First Explorations of Kentucky_ (Filson Club Publications
No. 13), p. 59.

[3] _First Explorations of Kentucky_ (Filson Club Publications No. 13),
pp. 85-86.

[4] MSS. of Major Pleasant Henderson in the _Draper Collection_,
Madison, Wisconsin; _Kentucky MSS._, vol. 2, fol. 23.

[5] Draper Collection: _Kentucky MSS._ vol. 1.

[6] The maternal grandfather of Abraham Lincoln.

[7] This copy of the journal was made from the original by Mary
Catharine Calk, granddaughter of Thomas Calk, Jr.

[8] Draper Collection: _Kentucky MSS._, vol. 4, cc. p. 85.

[9] _The Wilderness Road_: pp. 18-20.

[10] Draper Collection: _Kentucky MSS._, vol. 1, fol. 215.

[11] _Id._

[12] Draper Notes, Wisconsin Historical Society, vol. 2; _id._, _Martin
to Gov. Harrison_, Trip of 1860, vol. 3, p. 27.

[13] _Draper Notes_, vol. 2, p. 56.

[14] _Id._, pp. 126-127.

[15] _Kentucky Gazette_: no. 33, April 12, 1788.

[16] _Id._, no. 36, May 3, 1788.

[17] _Id._

[18] _Id._, no. 38, May 17, 1788.

[19] _Id._, vol. ii, no. 10, November 1, 1788.

[20] _Id._, vol. ii, no. 14, November 29, 1788.

[20*] See _Historic Highways of America_, vol. ii, note 32.

[21] Allen: _The Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_, pp. 251-252.

[22] Speed: _The Wilderness Road_, p. 30; cf. pp. 42, 43; cf. Roosevelt:
_The Winning of the West_ (1899), vol. i, p. 316.

[23] Draper Collection: _Kentucky MSS._, vol. 23, cc. pp. 19-24.

[24] Speed: _The Wilderness Road_, p. 30. Cf. _American Pioneer_, vol.
ii, pp. 219-220; _St. Clair Papers_, vol. ii, p. 246; _Life of Nathaniel
Massie_, p. 121; Collins's _History of Kentucky_, vol. ii, p. 327.

[25] _Draper's Notes_, vol. II, Trip 1860, iii, p. 56.

[26] Cf. _Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents_, vol. 1, p. 145.

[27] _Kentucky Gazette_: vol. ii, no. 9, October 25, 1788.

[28] _The Wilderness Road_, pp. 48-50.

[29] Collins: _History of Kentucky_, vol. ii, p. 242.

[30] _Id._, p. 213.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Obvious errors in spelling and punctuation have been corrected except
for narratives and letters included in this text.

3. Footnotes have been moved to the end of the main text body.

4. Images have been moved from the middle of a paragraph to the closest
paragraph break.

5. Carat character (^) followed by a single letter or a set of letters
in curly brackets is indicative of subscript in the original book.

6. For longtitude and latitude, the minutes and seconds are placed as
single quotes within brackets. For example: 38° 47['] 20[''].





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Historic Highways of America (Vol. 6), by 
Archer Butler Hulbert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIC HIGHWAYS OF AMERICA, VOL 6 ***

***** This file should be named 41143-8.txt or 41143-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/1/4/41143/

Produced by Greg Bergquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
