Project Gutenberg's Doctor Birch and His Young Friends, by M. A. Titmarsh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Doctor Birch and His Young Friends

Author: M. A. Titmarsh

Release Date: May 1, 2014 [EBook #45554]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOCTOR BIRCH AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS ***




Produced by David Widger from page images generously
provided by the Internet Archive






DOCTOR BIRCH AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS.

By Mr. M. A. Titmarsh.

London:

Chapman and Hall

1840.

[Illustration: 0008]

[Illustration: 0009]

[Illustration: 00011]




DOCTOR BIRCH.




THE DOCTOR AND HIS STAFF.

|There is no need to say why I became Assistant Master and Professor of
the English and French languages, flower-painting, and the German flute,
in Doctor Birch's Academy, at Rodwell Regis. Good folks may depend on
this that there was good reason for my leaving lodgings near London,
and a genteel society, for an under-master's desk in that old school.
I promise you, the fare at the Usher's table, the getting up at five
o'clock in the morning, the walking out with little boys in the fields,
(who used to play me tricks, and never could be got to respect my awful
and responsible character as teacher in the school,) Miss Birch's vulgar
insolence, Jack Birch's glum condescension, and the poor old Doctor's
patronage, were not matters in themselves pleasurable: and that that
patronage and those dinners were sometimes cruel hard to swallow. Never
mind--my connexion with the place is over now, and I hope they have got
a more efficient under-master.

Jack Birch (Rev. J. Birch, of St. Neot's Hall, Oxford,) is partner with
his father the Doctor, and takes some of the classes. About his Greek
I can't say much; but I will construe him in Latin any day. A more
supercilious little prig, (giving himself airs, too, about his cousin,
Miss Baby, who lives with the Doctor,) a more empty pompous little
coxcomb I never saw. His white neckcloth looked as if it choked him. He
used to try and look over that starch upon me and Prince the assistant,
as if we were a couple of footmen. He didn't do much business in the
school; but occupied his time in writing sanctified letters to the boys'
parents, and in composing dreary sermons to preach to them.

The real master of the school is Prince; an Oxford man too: shy,
haughty, and learned; crammed with Greek and a quantity of useless
learning; uncommonly kind to the small boys; pitiless with the fools
and the braggarts: respected of all for his honesty, his learning, his
bravery, (for he hit out once in a boat-row in a way which astonished
the boys and the bargemen,) and for a latent power about him, which all
saw and confessed somehow. Jack Birch could never look him in the face.
Old Miss Z. dared not put off any of _her_ airs upon him. Miss Rosa made
him the lowest of curtsies. Miss Raby said she was afraid of him.
Good old Prince! many a pleasant night we have smoked in the Doctor's
harness-room, whither we retired when our boys were gone to bed, and our
cares and canes put by.

After Jack Birch had taken his degree at Oxford--a process which he
effected with great difficulty--this place, which used to be called
"Birch's," "Dr. Birch's Academy," and what not, became suddenly
"Archbishop Wigsby's College of Rodwell Regis." They took down the old
blue board with the gold letters, which has been used to mend the pig-
stye since. Birch had a large school-room run up in the Gothic taste,
with statuettes, and a little belfry, and a bust of Archbishop Wigsby in
the middle of the school. He put the six senior boys into caps and
gowns, which had rather a good effect as the lads sauntered down the
street of the town, but which certainly provoked the contempt and
hostility of the bargemen; and so great was his rage for academic
costumes and ordinances, that he would have put me myself into a lay
gown, with red knots and fringes, but that I flatly resisted, and said
that a writing-master had no business with such paraphernalia.

By the way, I have forgotten to mention the Doctor himself. And what
shall I say of him? Well, he has a very crisp gown and bands, a solemn
air, a tremendous loud voice, and a grand and solemn air with the boys'
parents, whom he receives in a study, covered round with the best bound
books, which imposes upon many--upon the women especially--and makes
them fancy that this is a Doctor indeed. But, Law bless you! He never
reads the books; or opens one of them, except that in which he keeps his
bands--and a Dugdale's Monasticon, which looks like a book, but is in
reality a cupboard, where he has his almond cakes, and decanter of port
wine. He gets up his classics with translations, or what the boys call
cribs. They pass wicked tricks upon him when he hears the forms. The
elder wags go to his study, and ask him to help them in hard bits of
Herodotus or Thucydides: he says he will look over the passage, and
flies for refuge to Mr. Prince, or to the crib.

He keeps the flogging department in his own hands; finding that his
son was too savage. He has awful brows and a big voice. But his roar
frightens nobody. It is only a lion's skin, or, so to say, a muff.

Little Mordant made a picture of him with large ears, like a well-known
domestic animal, and had his own justly boxed for the caricature.
The Doctor discovered him in the fact, and was in a flaming rage, and
threatened whipping at first; but in the course of the day an opportune
basket of game arriving from Mordant's father, the Doctor became
mollified, and has burnt the picture with the ears. However I have one
wafered up in my desk by the hand of the same little rascal: and the
frontispiece of this very book is drawn from it.




THE COCK OF THE SCHOOL.

|I am growing an old fellow--and have seen many great folks in the
course of my travels and time--Louis Philippe coming out of the
Tuileries, His Majesty the King of Prussia and the Reichsverweser
accolading each other, at Cologne, at my elbow; Admiral Sir Charles
Napier (in an omnibus once), the Duke of Wellington, the immortal Goethe
at Weimar, the late benevolent Pope Gregory XVI., and a score more of
the famous in this world--the whom, whenever one looks at, one has a
mild shock of awe and tremor. I like this feeling and decent fear and
trembling with which a modest spirit salutes a _Great Man_.

Well, I have seen Generals capering on horseback at the head of their
crimson battalions; Bishops sailing down cathedral aisles, with downcast
eyes, pressing their trencher caps to their hearts with their fat white
hands; College heads when her Majesty is on a visit; the Doctor in all
his glory at the head of his school on Speech-day, a great sight,--and
all great men these.

I have never met the late Mr. Thomas Cribb, but I have no doubt should
have regarded him with the same feeling of awe with which I look every
day at George Champion, the cock of Dr. Birch's school.

When, I say, I reflect as I go up and set him a sum, that he could whop
me in two minutes, double up Prince and the other assistant, and pitch
the Doctor out of window, I can't but think how great, how generous, how
magnanimous a creature this is, that sits quite quiet and good-natured,
and works his equation, and ponders through his Greek play. He might
take the schoolroom pillars and pull the house down if he liked. He
might close the door, and demolish every one of us like Antar, the lover
of Ibla; but he lets us live. He never thrashes anybody without a cause,
when woe betide the tyrant or the sneak!

I think that to be strong, and able to whop everybody,--(not to do
it, mind you, but to feel that you were able to do it,)--would be the
greatest of all gifts. There is a serene good humour which plays about
George Champion's broad face, which shows the consciousness of this
power, and lights up his honest blue eyes with a magnanimous calm.

He is invictus. Even when a cub there was no beating this lion. Six
years ago the undaunted little warrior actually stood up to Frank
Davison,--(the Indian officer now--poor little Charley's brother, whom
Miss Raby nursed so affectionately,)--then seventeen years old, and the
cock of Birch's. They were obliged to drag off the boy, and Frank, with
admiration and regard for him, prophesied the great things he would do.
Legends of combats are preserved fondly in schools; they have stories of
such at Rodwell Regis, performed in the old Doctor's time, forty years
ago.

Champion's affair with the Young Tutbury Pet, who was down here in
training,--with Black the Bargeman,--with the three head boys of Doctor
Wapshot's academy, whom he caught maltreating an outlying day-boy
of ours, &c.,--are known to all the Rodwell Regis men. He was always
victorious. He is modest and kind, like all great men. He has a good,
brave, honest understanding. He cannot make verses like young Pinder,
or read Greek like Lawrence the Prefect, who is a perfect young abyss of
learning, and knows enough, Prince says, to furnish any six first-class
men; but he does his work in a sound, downright way, and he is made
to be the bravest of soldiers, the best of country parsons, an honest
English gentleman wherever he may go.

[Illustration: 0021]

Like all great men, George is good-humoured and lazy. There is a
particular bench in the play-ground on which he will loll for hours on
half-holidays, and is so affable that the smallest boys come and speak
to him. It is pleasant to see the young cubs frisking round the honest
lion. His chief friend and attendant, however, is young Jack Hall, whom
he saved when drowning, out of the Miller's Pool. The attachment of the
two is curious to witness. The smaller lad gambolling, playing tricks
round the bigger one, and perpetually making fun of his protector. They
are never far apart, and of holidays you may meet them miles away from
the school. George sauntering heavily down the lanes with his big stick,
and little Jack larking with the pretty girls in the cottage windows.

George has a boat on the river, in which, however, he commonly lies
smoking, whilst Jack sculls him. He does not play at cricket, except
when the school plays the county, or at Lord's in the holidays. The boys
can't stand his bowling, and when he hits, it is like trying to catch a
cannon-ball. I have seen him at tennis. It is a splendid sight to behold
the young fellow bounding over the court with streaming yellow hair,
like young Apollo in a flannel jacket.

The other head boys are Lawrence the Captain, Bunce, famous chiefly for
his magnificent appetite, and Pitman, sur-named Roscius, for his love of
the drama. Add to these Swanky, called Macassar, from his partiality
to that condiment, and who has varnished boots, wears white gloves on
Sundays, and looks out for Miss Pinkerton's school (transferred from
Chiswick to Rodwell Regis, and conducted by the nieces of the late Miss
Barbara Pinkerton, the friend of Our Great Lexicograplier, upon the
principles approved by him and practised by that admirable woman,) as it
passes into church.

[Illustration: 0025]

Representations have been made concerning Mr. Horace Swanky's
behaviour; rumours have been uttered about notes in verse, conveyed in
three-cornered puffs, by Mrs. Buggies, who serves Miss Pinkerton's young
ladies on Fridays--and how Miss Didow, to whom the tart and enclosure
were addressed, tried to make away with herself by swallowing a ball of
cotton. But I pass over these absurd reports, as likely to affect the
reputation of an admirable Seminary conducted by irreproachable females.
As they go into church (Miss P. driving in her flock of lambkins with
the crook of her parasol,) how can it be helped if her forces and ours
sometimes collide, as the boys are on their way up to the organ-loft?
And I don't believe a word about the three-cornered puff, but rather
that it was the invention of that jealous Miss Birch, who is jealous of
Miss Raby, jealous of everybody who is good and handsome, and who has
_her own ends_ in view, or I am very much in error.




THE LITTLE SCHOOL-ROOM.

|What they call the little school-room is a small room at the other end
of the great school; through which you go to the Doctor's private house,
and where Miss Raby sits with her pupils. She has a half-dozen very
small ones over whom she presides and teaches them in her simple way,
until they are big or learned enough to face the great school-room. Many
of them are in a hurry for promotion, the graceless little simpletons,
and know no more than their elders when they are well off.

[Illustration: 0029]

She keeps the accounts, writes out the bills, superintends the linen and
sews on the general shirt-buttons. Think of having such a woman at home
to sew on one's shirt-buttons! But peace, peace, thou foolish heart!

Miss Raby is the Doctor's niece. Her mother was a beauty (quite unlike
old Zoe therefore); and she married a pupil in the old Doctor's time,
who was killed afterwards, a Captain in the East India service, at
the siege of Bhurtpore. Hence a number of Indian children come to the
Doctor's, for Raby was very much liked, and the uncle's kind reception
of the orphan has been a good speculation for the school-keeper.

It is wonderful how brightly and gaily that little quick creature
does her duty. She is the first to rise, and the last to sleep, if any
business is to be done. She sees the other two women go off to parties
in the town without even so much as wishing to join them. It is
Cinderella, only contented to stay at home--content to bear Zoe's scorn
and to admit Flora's superior charms,--and to do her utmost to repay her
uncle for his great kindness in housing her.

So, you see, she works as much as three maid-servants for the wages of
one. She is as thankful when the Doctor gives her a new gown, as if
he had presented her with a fortune: laughs at his stories most
good-humouredly, listens to Zoe's scolding most meekly, admires Flora
with all her heart, and only goes out of the way when Jack Birch shows
his sallow face: for she can't bear him, and always finds work when he
comes near.

How different she is when some folks approach her! I won't be
presumptuous; but I think, I think, I have made a not unfavourable
impression in some quarters. However, let us be mum on this subject. I
like to see her, because she always looks good-humoured; because she is
always kind, because she is always modest, because she is fond of those
poor little brats--orphans some of them,--because she is rather pretty,
I dare say, or because I think so, which comes to the same thing.

Though she is kind to all, it must be owned she shows the most gross
favouritism towards the amiable children. She brings them cakes from
dessert, and regales them with Zoe's preserves; spends many of her
little shillings in presents for her favourites, and will tell them
stories by the hour. She has one very sad story about a little boy, who
died long ago; the younger children are never weary of hearing about
him; and Miss Raby has shown to one of them a lock of the little chap's
hair, which she keeps in her work-box to this day.




THE DEAR BROTHERS.

_A Melodrama in several Rounds_.

The Doctor.

Mr. Tipper, Uncle to the Masters Boxall.

Boxall Major, Boxall Minor, Brown, Jones, Smith,

Robinson, Tiffin Minimus.

B. Go it old Boxall.

J. Give it him young Boxall.

R. Pitch into him old Boxall.

S. Two to one on young Boxall.

                        [Enter Tiffin Minimus, _running._

_Tiffin Minimus_. Boxalls! you 're wanted.

(_The Doctor to Mr. Tipper._) Every boy in the school loves them,
my dear sir; your nephews are a credit to my establishment. They are
orderly, well-conducted, gentleman-like boys. Let us enter and find them
at their studies.

                        [_Enter_ The Doctor _and_ Mr. Tipper.

GRAND TABLEAU.




A HOPELESS CASE.

|Let us, people who are so uncommonly clever and learned, have a great
tenderness and pity for the poor folks who are not endowed with the
prodigious talents which we have. I have always had a regard for
dunces;--those of my own school-days were amongst the pleasantest of the
fellows, and have turned out by no means the dullest in life; whereas
many a youth who could turn off Latin hexameters by the yard, and
construe Greek quite glibly, is no better than a feeble prig now, with
not a pennyworth more brains than were in his head before his beard
grew.

Those poor dunces! Talk of being the last man, ah! what a pang it must
be to be the last boy--huge, misshapen, fourteen years of age,--and
"taken up" by a chap who is but six years old, and can't speak quite
plain yet!

[Illustration: 0037]

Master Hulker is in that condition at Birch's. He is the most honest,
kind, active, plucky, generous creature. He can do many things better
than most boys. He can go up a tree, jump, play at cricket, dive and
swim perfectly--he can eat twice as much as almost any lady (as Miss
Birch well knows), he has a pretty talent at carving figures with his
hack-knife, he makes and paints little coaches, he can take a watch to
pieces and put it together again. He can do everything but learn his
lesson; and there he sticks at the bottom of the school, hopeless. As
the little boys are drafted in from Miss Raby's class, (it is true she
is one of the best instructresses in the world,) they enter and hop over
poor Hulker. He would be handed over to the governess only he is too
big. Sometimes I used to think, that this desperate stupidity was a
stratagem of the poor rascal's; and that he shammed dulness so that he
might be degraded into Miss Raby's class: if she would teach _me_, I
know, before George, I would put on a pinafore and a little jacket--but
no, it is a natural incapacity for the Latin Grammar.

If you could see his grammar, it is a perfect curiosity of dog's ears.
The leaves and cover are all curled and ragged. Many of the pages are
worn away, with the rubbing of his elbows as he sits poring over the
hopeless volume, with the blows of his fists as he thumps it madly, or
with the poor fellow's tears. You see him wiping them away with the back
of his hand, as he tries and tries, and can't do it.

When I think of that Latin Grammar, and that infernal As in Præsenti,
and of other things which I was made to learn in my youth: upon my
conscience I am surprised that we ever survived it. When one thinks
of the boys who have been caned because they could not master that
intolerable jargon! Good Lord, what a pitiful chorus these poor little
creatures send up! Be gentle with them, ye schoolmasters, and only whop
those who _won't_ learn.

The Doctor has operated upon Hulker (between ourselves), but the boy was
so little affected you would have thought he had taken chloroform. Birch
is weary of whipping now, and leaves the boy to go his own gait. Prince,
when he hears the lesson, and who cannot help making fun of a fool,
adopts the sarcastic manner with Master Hulker, and says, "Mr. Hulker,
may I take the liberty to inquire if your brilliant intellect has
enabled you to perceive the difference between those words which
grammarians have defined as substantive and adjective nouns?--if not,
perhaps Mr. Ferdinand Timmins will instruct you." And Timmins hops over
Hulker's head.

I wish Prince would leave off girding at the poor lad. He's an only son,
and his mother is a widow woman, who loves him with all her might. There
is a famous sneer about the suckling of fools and the chronicling of
small beer; but remember it was a rascal who uttered it.




A WORD ABOUT MISS BIRCH.

"The Gentlemen, and especially the younger and more tender of the
Pupils, will have the advantage of the constant superintendence and
affectionate care of Miss Zoe Birch, sister of the Principal: whose
dearest aim will be to supply (as far as may be) the absent maternal
friend."--_Prospectus of Rodwell Regis School_.

This is all very fine in the Doctor's circulars, and Miss Zoe Birch--(a
sweet birch blossom it is, fifty-five years old, during two score of
which she has dosed herself with pills; with a nose as red and a face as
sour as a crab-apple)--may do mighty well in a prospectus. But I should
like to know who would take Miss Zoe for a mother, or would have her for
one?

[Illustration: 0042]

The only persons in the house who are not afraid of her are Miss Flora
and I--no, I am afraid of her, though I _do_ know the story about the
French usher in 1830--but all the rest tremble before the woman, from
the Doctor down to poor Francis the knife-boy, and whom she bullies into
his miserable blacking-hole.

The Doctor is a pompous and outwardly severe man--but inwardly weak
and easy: loving a joke and a glass of port wine. I get on with him,
therefore, much better than Mr. Prince, who scorns him for an ass,
and under whose keen eyes the worthy Doctor writhes like a convicted
impostor; and many a sunshiny afternoon would he have said, "Mr. T.,
Sir, shall we try another glass of that yellow sealed wine which you
seem to like?" (and which he likes even better than I do), had not the
old harridan of a Zoe been down upon us, and insisted on turning me
out with her miserable weak coffee. She a mother indeed! A sour milk
generation she would have nursed. She is always croaking, scolding,
bullying,--yowling at the housemaids, snarling at Miss Raby, bowwowing
after the little boys, barking after the big ones. She knows how much
every boy eats to an ounce; and her delight is to ply with fat the
little ones who can't bear it, and with raw meat those who hate
underdone. It was she who caused the Doctor to be eaten out three times;
and nearly created a rebellion in the school because she insisted on his
flogging Goliah Longman.

The only time that woman is happy is when she comes in of a morning to
the little boys' dormitories with a cup of hot Epsom salts, and a sippet
of bread. Boo!--the very notion makes me quiver. She stands over them.
I saw her do it to young Byles only a few days since--and her presence
makes the abomination doubly abominable.

As for attending them in real illness, do you suppose that she would
watch a single night for any one of them? Not she. When poor little
Charley Davison (that child, a lock of whose soft hair I have said how
Miss Raby still keeps) lay ill of scarlet fever in the holidays--for the
Colonel, the father of these boys, was in India--it was Anne Raby who
tended the child, who watched him all through the fever, who never left
him while it lasted, or until she had closed the little eyes that were
never to brighten or moisten more. Anny watched and deplored him, but it
was Miss Birch who wrote the letter announcing his demise, and got the
gold chain and locket which the Colonel ordered as a memento of his
gratitude. It was through a row with Miss Birch that Frank Davison ran
away. I promise you that after he joined his regiment in India, the
Ahmednuggar Irregulars, which his gallant father commands, there came
over no more annual shawls and presents to Dr. and Miss Birch, and that
if she fancied the Colonel was coming home to marry her (on account of
her tenderness to his motherless children, which he was always writing
about), _that_ notion was very soon given up. But these affairs are
of early date, seven years back, and I only heard of them in a very
confused manner from Miss Raby, who was a girl, and had just come to
Rodwell Regis. She is always very much moved when she speaks about those
boys, which is but seldom. I take it the death of the little one still
grieves her tender heart.

Yes, it is Miss Birch, who has turned away seventeen ushers and second
masters in eleven years, and half as many French masters; inconsolable,
I suppose, since the departure of her _favourite_, M. Grinche, with her
gold watch, &c.; but this is only surmise--and what I gather from the
taunts of Miss Rosa when she and her aunt have a tiff at tea.

But besides this, I have another way of keeping her in order.

Whenever she is particularly odious or insolent to Miss Raby, I have but
to introduce raspberry jam into the conversation, and the woman holds
her tongue. She will understand me. I need not say more.

_Note, 12th December_.--I _may_ speak now. I have left the place and
don't mind. I say then at once, and without caring twopence for the
consequences, that I saw this woman, this _mother_ of the boys, _eating
jam with a spoon out of Master Wiggins's trunk in the box-room_; and of
this I am ready to take an affidavit any day.




A TRAGEDY.

THIS DRAMA OUGHT TO BE REPRESENTED IN ABOUT SIX CUTS.

_[The School is hushed. Lawrence the Prefect, and Custos of the rods, is
marching after the Doctor into the operating-room. Master Backhouse is
about to follow.]_

[Illustration: 0048]

_Master Backhouse_. It's all very well, but you see if I don't pay you
out after school--you sneak, you.

_Master Lurcher_. If you do I '1l tell again.

                        [Exit Backhouse.

[_The rod is heard from the adjoining apartment.
Hwish--Hhwish--hwish--hwish--hwish--hwish--hwish._]

                        [Re-enter Backhouse.




BRIGGS IN LUCK.

_Enter the Knife-boy_.--Hamper for Briggses!

_Master Brown._--Hurray, Tom Briggs! I'll lend you my knife.

If this story does not carry its own moral, what fable does, I wonder?
Before the arrival of that hamper, Master Briggs was in no better repute
than any other young gentleman of the lower school; and in fact I had
occasion myself, only lately, to correct Master Brown for kicking his
friend's shins during the writing-lesson. But how this basket directed
by his mother's housekeeper, and marked "Glass with care," (whence I
conclude that it contains some jam and some bottles of wine probably, as
well as the usual cake and game-pie, and half a sovereign for the elder
Master B., and five new shillings for Master Decimus Briggs)--how,
I say, the arrival of this basket, alters all Master Briggs's
circumstances in life, and the estimation in which many persons regard
him!

[Illustration: 0051]

If he is a good-hearted boy, as I have reason to think, the very first
thing he will do, before inspecting the contents of the hamper, or
cutting into them with the knife which Master Brown has so considerately
lent him; will be to read over the letter from home which lies on the
top of the parcel. He does so, as I remark to Miss Raby (for whom I
happened to be mending pens when the little circumstance arose), with a
flushed face and winking eyes. Look how the other boys are peering into
the basket as he reads.--I say to her, "Isn't it a pretty picture?" Part
of the letter is in a very large hand. That is from his little sister.
And I would wager that she netted the little purse which he has just
taken out of it, and which Master Lynx is eyeing.

"You are a droll man, and remark all sorts of queer things," Miss Raby
says, smiling, and plying her swift needle and fingers as quick as
possible.

"I am glad we are both on the spot, and that the little fellow
lies under our guns as it were, and so is protected from some such
brutal school-pirates as young Duval for instance, who would rob him
probably of some of those good things, good in themselves, and better
because fresh from home. See, there is a pie as I said, and which I dare
say is better than those which are served at our table (but you never
take any notice of these kind of things, Miss Raby), a cake of course, a
bottle of currant wine, jam-pots, and no end of pears in the straw.

"With this money little Briggs will be able to pay the tick which that
imprudent child has run up with Mrs. Ruggles; and I shall let Briggs
Major pay for the pencil-case which Bullock sold to him.--It will be a
lesson to the young prodigal for the future.

"But, I say, what a change there will be in his life for some time to
come, and at least until his present wealth is spent! The boys who bully
him will mollify towards him, and accept his pie and sweetmeats.
They will have feasts in the bed-room; and that wine will taste more
deliciously to them than the best out of the Doctor's cellar. The
cronies will be invited. Young Master Wagg will tell his most dreadful
story and sing his best song for a slice of that pie. What a jolly night
they will have! When we go the rounds at night, Mr. Prince and I will
take care to make a noise before we come to Briggs's room, so that the
boys may have time to put the light out, to push the things away, and
to scud into bed. Doctor Spry may be put in requisition the next
morning..."

"Nonsense! you absurd creature," cries out Miss Raby, laughing; and I
lay down the twelfth pen very nicely mended.

"Yes; after luxury comes the doctor, I say; after extravagance, a hole
in the breeches pocket. To judge from his disposition, Briggs Major will
not be much better off a couple of days hence than he is now, and, if
I am not mistaken, will end life a poor man. Brown will be kicking his
shins before a week is over, depend upon it. There are boys and men of
all sorts, Miss R.--there are selfish sneaks who hoard until the store
they daren't use grows mouldy--there are spendthrifts who fling away,
parasites who flatter and lick its shoes, and snarling curs who hate
and envy, good fortune."--I put down the last of the pens, brushing away
with it the quill-chips from her desk first, and she looked at me with a
kind wondering face. I brushed them away, clicked the pen-knife into
my pocket, made her a bow, and walked off--for the bell was ringing for
school.




A YOUNG FELLOW WHO IS PRETTY SURE TO SUCCEED.

|If Master Briggs is destined in all probability to be a poor man, the
chances are, that Mr. Bullock will have a very different lot. He is
a son of a partner of the eminent banking firm of Bullock and Hulker,
Lombard Street, and very high in the upper school--quite out of my
jurisdiction, consequently.

He writes the most beautiful current hand ever seen; and the way in
which he mastered arithmetic (going away into recondite and wonderful
rules in the Tutor's Assistant, which some masters even dare not
approach) is described by the Doctor in terms of admiration. He is
Mr. Prince's best algebra pupil; and a very fair classic, too, doing
everything well for which he has a mind.

He does not busy himself with the sports of his comrades, and holds a
cricket-bat no better than Miss Raby would. He employs the play hours
in improving his mind, and reading the newspaper; he is a profound
politician, and, it must be owned, on the Liberal side. The elder boys
despise him rather; and when Champion Major passes, he turns his head,
and looks down. I don't like the expression of Bullock's narrow, green
eyes, as they follow the elder Champion, who does not seem to know or
care how much the other hates him.

No--Mr. Bullock, though perhaps the cleverest and most accomplished boy
in the school, associates with the quite little boys when he is minded
for society. To these he is quite affable, courteous, and winning.
He never fagged or thrashed one of them. He has done the verses and
corrected the exercises of many, and many is the little lad to whom he
has lent a little money.

It is true he charges at the rate of a penny a week for every sixpence
lent out, but many a fellow to whom tarts are a present necessity is
happy to pay this interest for the loan. These transactions are kept
secret. Mr. Bullock, in rather a whining tone, when he takes Master
Green aside and does the requisite business for him, says, "You know
you'll go and talk about it everywhere. I don't want to lend you the
money, I want to buy something with it. It's only to oblige you; and yet
I am sure you will go and make fun of me." Whereon, of course, Green,
eager for the money, vows solemnly that the transaction shall be
confidential, and only speaks when the payment of the interest becomes
oppressive.

Thus it is that Mr. Bullock's practices are at all known. At a very
early period indeed his commercial genius manifested itself; and by
happy speculations in toffey; by composing a sweet drink made of stick
liquorice and brown sugar, and selling it at a profit to the younger
children; by purchasing a series of novels, which he let out at an
adequate remuneration; by doing boys exercises for a penny, and other
processes, he showed the bent of his mind. At the end of the half year
he always went home richer than when he arrived at school, with his
purse full of money.

Nobody knows how much he brought: but the accounts are fabulous. Twenty,
thirty, fifty--it is impossible to say how many sovereigns. When joked
about his money, he turns pale and swears he has not a shilling: whereas
he has had a banker's account ever since he was thirteen years old.

At the present moment he is employed in negotiating the sale of a knife
with Master Green, and is pointing out to the latter the beauty of the
six blades, and that he need not pay until after the holidays.

[Illustration: 0059]

Champion Major has sworn that he will break every bone in his skin the
next time that he cheats a little boy, and is bearing down upon him.
Let us come away. It is frightful to see that big peaceful clever coward
moaning under well deserved blows and whining for mercy.




DUVAL, THE PIRATE.

(_Jones Minimus passes, laden with tarts._)

[Illustration: 0062]

_Duval_. Hullo! you small boy with the tarts! Come here, Sir.

_Jones Minimus_. Please, Duval, they ain't mine.

_Duval._ O you abominable young story-teller.

                        [He confiscates the goods.

I think I like young Duval's mode of levying contributions better than
Bullock's. The former's, at least, has the merit of more candour. Duval
is the pirate of Birch's, and lies in wait for small boys laden with
money or provender. He scents plunder from afar off: and pounces out on
it. Woe betide the little fellow when Duval boards him!

There was a youth here whose money I used to keep, as he was of an
extravagant and weak disposition; and I doled it out to him in weekly
shillings, sufficient for the purchase of the necessary tarts. This boy
came to me one day for half a sovereign, for a very particular purpose,
he said. I afterwards found he wanted to lend the money to Duval.

The young ogre burst out laughing, when in a great wrath and fury I
ordered him to refund to the little boy: and proposed a bill of exchange
at three months. It is true Duval's father does not pay the Doctor, and
the lad never has a shilling, save that which he levies; and though he
is always bragging about the splendour of Freenystown, Co. Cork, and
the fox-hounds his father keeps, and the claret they drink there--there
comes no remittance from Castle Freeny in these bad times to the honest
Doctor, who is a kindly man enough, and never yet turned an insolvent
boy out of doors.




THE DORMITORIES.

_MASTER HEWLETT AND MASTER NIGHTINGALE._

(Rather a cold winter night.)

_Hewlett (flinging a shoe at Master Nightingale's bed, with which he
hits that young gentleman.)_ Hullo! You! Get up and bring me that shoe.

[Illustration: 0066]

_Nightingale._ Yes, Hewlett. _(He gets up.)_

_Hewlett_. Don't drop it, and be very careful of it, Sir.

_Nightingale_. Yes, Hewlett.

_Hewlett_. Silence in the Dormitory! Any boy who opens his mouth I'll
murder him. Now, Sir, are not you the boy what can sing?

_Nightingale_. Yes, Hewlett.

_Hewlett_. Chaunt then till I go to sleep, and if I wake when you stop,
you 'll have this at your head.

          [Master Hewlett lays his Bluchers on the bed, ready to shy at Master
Nightingale's head in the case contemplated.

_Nightingale (timidly.)_ Please, Hewlett?

_Hewlett_. Well, Sir.

_Nightingale_. May I put on my trowsers, please? _Hewlett. No_, Sir. Go
on, or I '11--

_Nightingale_,

                   "Through pleasures and palaces

                        Though we may roam,

                   Be it ever so humble,

                        There's no place like home.

               "Home, home! sweet, sweet home!

                   There's no place like ho-ome!

                   There's no place like home!"

                        (Da Capo.)




A CAPTURE AND A RESCUE.

[Illustration: 0070]

My young friend, Patrick Champion, George's younger brother, is a late
arrival among us; has much of the family quality and good-nature; is not
in the least a tyrant to the small boys, but is as eager as an Amadis to
fight. He is boxing his way up the school, emulating his great brother.
He fixes his eye on a boy above him in strength or size, and you hear
somehow that a difference has arisen between them at football, and they
have their coats off presently. He has thrashed himself over the heads
of many youths in this manner; for instance, if Champion can lick
Dobson, who can thrash Hobson, how much more, then, can he thrash
Hobson. Thus he works up and establishes his position in the school. Nor
does Mr. Prince think it advisable that we ushers should walk much in
the way when these little differences are being settled, unless there is
some gross disparity, or danger is apprehended.

For instance, I own to having seen the row depicted here as I was
shaving at my bed-room window. I did not hasten down to prevent its
consequences. Fogle had confiscated a top, the property of Snivins, the
which, as the little wretch was always pegging it at my toes, I did
not regret. Snivins whimpered; and young Champion came up, lusting for
battle. Directly he made out Fogle, he steered for him, pulling up his
coat-sleeves, and clearing for action.

"Who spoke to _you_, young Champion?" Fogle said, and he flung down
the top to Master Snivins. I knew there would be no fight; and perhaps
Champion, too, was disappointed.




THE GARDEN,

_WHERE THE PARLOUR-BOARDERS GO._

Noblemen have been rather scarce at Birch's--but the heir of a great
Prince has been living with the Doctor for some years.--He is Lord
George Gaunt's eldest son, the noble Plan-tagenet Gaunt Gaunt, and
nephew of the Most Honourable the Marquis of Steyne.

[Illustration: 0074]

They are very proud of him at the Doctor's--and the two Misses and Papa,
whenever a stranger comes down whom they want to dazzle, are pretty sure
to bring Lord Steyne into the conversation, mentioning the last party
at Gaunt House, and cursorily remarking that they have with them a young
friend who will be in all human probability Marquis of Steyne and Earl
of Gaunt, &c.

Plantagenet does not care much about these future honours: provided
he can get some brown sugar on his bread and butter, or sit with three
chairs and play at coach and horses, quite quietly by himself, he is
tolerably happy. He saunters in and out of school when he likes, and
looks at the masters and other boys with a listless grin. He used to be
taken to church, but he laughed and talked in odd places, so they are
forced to leave him at home now. He will sit with a bit of string and
play cats-cradle for many hours. He likes to go and join the very small
children at their games. Some are frightened at him, but they soon cease
to fear, and order him about. I have seen him go and fetch tarts from
Mrs. Ruggles for a boy of eight years old; and cry bitterly if he did
not get a piece. He cannot speak quite plain, but very nearly; and is
not more, I suppose, than three-and-twenty.

Of course at home they know his age, though they never come and see him.
But they forget that Miss Rosa Birch is no longer a young chit as
she was ten years ago, when Gaunt was brought to the school. On the
contrary, she has had no small experience in the tender passion, and is
at this moment smitten with a disinterested affection for Plantagenet
Gaunt.

Next to a little doll with a burnt nose, which he hides away in cunning
places, Mr. Gaunt is very fond of Miss Rosa too. What a pretty match
it would make! and how pleased they would be at Gaunt House, if the
grandson and heir of the great Marquis of Steyne, the descendant of a
hundred Gaunts and Tudors, should marry Miss Birch, the schoolmaster's
daughter! It is true she has the sense on her side, and poor Plantagenet
is only an idiot: but there he is, a zany, with such expectations and
such a pedigree!

If Miss Rosa would run away with Mr. Gaunt, she would leave off bullying
her cousin, Miss Anny Raby. Shall I put her up to the notion, and offer
to lend her the money to run away? Mr. Gaunt is not allowed money. He
had some once, but Bullock took him into a corner, and got it from him.
He has a moderate tick opened at the tart-woman's. He stops at Rodwell
Regis through the year, school-time and holiday time; it is all the same
to him. Nobody asks about him, or thinks about him, save twice a year,
when the Doctor goes to Gaunt House, and gets the amount of his bills,
and a glass of wine in the steward's room.

And yet you see somehow that he is a gentleman. His manner is different
to that of the owners of that coarse table and parlour at which he is a
boarder, (I do not speak of Miss R. of course, for _her_ manners are
as good as those of a Duchess). When he caught Miss Rosa boxing
little Fiddes's ears, his face grew red, and he broke into a fierce,
inarticulate rage. After that, and for some days, he used to shrink
from her; but they are reconciled now. I saw them this afternoon in
the garden, where only the parlour-boarders walk. He was playful, and
touched her with his stick. She raised her handsome eyes in surprise,
and smiled on him very kindly.

The thing was so clear, that I thought it my duty to speak to old Zoe
about it. The wicked old catamaran told me she wished that some people
would mind their own business, and hold their tongues--that some people
were paid to teach writing, and not to tell tales and make mischief:
and I have since been thinking whether I ought to communicate with the
Doctor.




THE OLD PUPIL.

|As I came into the play-grounds this morning, I saw a dashing young
fellow, with a tanned face and a blonde moustache, who was walking up
and down the green, arm-in-arm with Champion Major, and followed by a
little crowd of boys.

They were talking of old times evidently. "What had become of Irvine and
Smith?"--"Where was Bill Harris and Jones, not Squinny Jones, but Cocky
Jones?"--and so forth. The gentleman was no stranger; he was an old
pupil evidently, come to see if any of his old comrades remained, and to
revisit the _cari luogi_ of his youth.

Champion was evidently proud of his arm-fellow. He espied his brother,
young Champion, and introduced him. "Come here, Sir," he called. "The
young 'un wasn't here in your time, Davison."

"Pat, Sir," said he, "this is Captain Davison, one of Birch's boys. Ask
him who was among the first in the lines at Sobraon?"

Pat's face kindled up as he looked Davison full in the face, and held
out his hand. Old Champion and Davison both blushed. The infantry set up
a "Hurray! hurray! hurray!" Champion leading, and waving his wide-awake.
I protest that the scene did one good to witness. Here was the hero and
cock of the school come back to see his old haunts and cronies. He had
always remembered them. Since he had seen them last, he had faced death
and achieved honour. But for my dignity I would have shied up my hat
too.

With a resolute step, and his arm still linked in Champion's, Captain
Davison now advanced, followed by a wake of little boys, to that corner
of the green where Mrs. Buggies has her tart-stand.

"Hullo, Mother Buggies! don't you remember me?" he said, and shook her
by the hand.

"Lor, if it ain't Davison Major!" she said. "Well, Davison Major, you
owe me fourpence for two sausage-rolls from when you went away."

Davison laughed, and all the little crew of boys set up a similar
chorus.

"I buy the whole shop," he said. "Now, young 'uns--eat away!"

Then there was such a "Hurray! hurray!" as surpassed the former cheer in
loudness. Everybody engaged in it except Piggy Duff, who made an instant
dash at the three-cornered puffs, but was stopped by Champion, who
said there should be a fair distribution. And so there was, and no one
lacked, neither of raspberry open-tarts, nor of mellifluous bull's-eyes,
nor of polonies, beautiful to the sight and taste.

The hurraying brought out the Doctor himself, who put his hand up to his
spectacles and started when he saw the old pupil. Each blushed when
he recognised the other; for seven years ago they had parted not good
friends.

"What--Davison?" the Doctor said, with a tremulous voice. "God bless
you, my dear fellow!"--and they shook hands. "A half-holiday, of course,
boys," he added, and there was another hurray: there was to be no end to
the cheering that day.

"How's--how's the family, Sir?" Captain Davison asked.

"Come in and see. Flora's grown quite a lady. Dine with us, of course.
Champion Major, come to dinner at five. Mr. Titmarsh, the pleasure of
your company?" The Doctor swung open the garden-gate: the old master and
pupil entered the house reconciled.

I thought I would just peep into Miss Raby's room, and tell her of this
event. She was working away at her linen there, as usual, quiet and
cheerful.

"You should put up," I said with a smile; "the Doctor has given us a
half-holiday."

"I never have holidays," Miss Raby replied.

Then I told her of the scene I had just witnessed, of the arrival of the
old pupil, the purchase of the tarts, the proclamation of the holiday,
and the shouts of the boys of "Hurray, Davison."

"_Who_ is it?" cried out Miss Raby, starting and turning as white as a
sheet.

I told her it was Captain Davison from India, and described the
appearance and behaviour of the Captain. When I had finished speaking,
she asked me to go and get her a glass of water; she felt unwell. But
she was gone when I came back with the water.

I know all now. After sitting for a quarter of an hour with the Doctor,
who attributed his guest's uneasiness no doubt to his desire to see Miss
Laura Birch, Davison started up and said he wanted to see Miss Raby.
"You remember, Sir, how kind she was to my little brother," he said.
Whereupon the Doctor, with a look of surprise that anybody should want
to see Miss Raby, said she was in the little school-room, whither the
Captain went, knowing the way from old times.

A few minutes afterwards, Miss B. and Miss Z. returned from a drive
with Plantagenet Gaunt in their one-horse fly, and being informed of
Davison's arrival, and that he was closeted with Miss Raby in the little
school-room, of course made for that apartment at once. I was coming
into it from the other door. I wanted to know whether she had drunk the
water.

[Illustration: 0084]

This is what both parties saw. The two were in this very attitude.
"Well, upon my word!" cries out Miss Zoe, But Davison did not let go his
hold; and Miss Raby's head only sank down on his hand.

"You must get another governess, Sir, for the little boys," Frank
Davison said to the Doctor. "Anny Raby has promised to come with me."

You may suppose I shut to the door on my side. And when I returned to
the little school-room, it was blank and empty. Everybody was gone. I
could hear the boys shouting at play in the green, outside. The glass
of water was on the table where I had placed it. I took it and drank
it myself, to the health of Anny Raby and her husband. It was rather a
choker.

But of course I wasn't going to stop on at Birch's. When his young
friends re-assemble on the 1st of February next, they will have two new
masters. Prince resigned too, and is at present living with me at my
old lodgings at Mrs. Cammysole's. If any nobleman or gentleman wants a
private tutor for his son, a note to the Rev. F. Prince will find him
there.

Miss Clapperclaw says we are both a couple of old fools; and that she
knew, when I set off last year to Rodwell Regis, after meeting the two
young ladies at a party at General Champion's house in our street, that
I was going on a goose's errand. Well, well, that journey is over now; I
shall dine at the General's on Christmas-day, where I shall meet Captain
and Mrs. Davison, and some of the old pupils of Birch's; and I wish a
merry Christmas to them, and to all young and old boys.

|The play is done; the curtain drops,

Slow falling, to the prompter's bell:

A moment yet the actor stops,

               And looks around, to say farewell.

               It is an irksome word and task;

               And when he 's laughed and said his say,

               He shows, as he removes the mask,

               A face that's anything but gay.

               One word, ere yet the evening ends,

               Let's close it with a parting rhyme,

               And pledge a hand to all young friends,

               As fits the merry Christmas-time.

               On life's wide scene you, too, have parts,

               That Fate ere long shall bid you play;

               Good night! with honest gentle hearts

               A kindly greeting go alway!

               Good night!--I'd say, the griefs, the joys,

               Just hinted in this mimic page,

               The triumphs and defeats of boys,

               Are but repeated in our age.

               I 'd say, your woes were not less keen,

               Your hopes more vain, than those of men;

               Your pangs or pleasures of fifteen,

               At forty-five played o'er again.

               I'd say, we suffer and we strive

               Not less nor more as men than boys;

               With grizzled beards at forty-five,

               As erst at twelve, in corduroys.

               And if, in time of sacred youth,

               We learned at home to love and pray,

               Pray Heaven, that early Love and Truth

               May never wholly pass away.

               And in the world, as in the school,

               I 'd say, how fate may change and shift;

               The prize be sometimes with the fool,

               The race not always to the swift.

               The strong may yield, the good may fall,

               The great man he a vulgar clown,

               The knave be lifted over all,

               The kind cast pitilessly down.

               Who knows the inscrutable design?

               Blessed be He who took and gave!

               Why should your mother, Charles, not mine,

               Be weeping at her darling's grave? *

               We bow to Heaven that will'd it so,

               That darkly rules the fate of all,

               That sends the respite or the blow,

               That's free to give or to recall.

               This crowns his feast with wine and wit:

               Who brought him to that mirth aud state?

               His betters, see, below him sit,

               Or hunger hopeless at the gate.

               Who bade the mud from Dives' wheel

               To spurn the rags of Lazarus?

               Come, brother, in that dust we '11 kneel,

               Confessing Heaven that ruled it thus.

                               * C. B., ob. 29 Nov. 1848, set. 42.

               So each shall mourn, in life's advance,

               Dear hopes, dear friends, untimely killed;

               Shall grieve for many a forfeit chance,

               And longing passion unfulfilled.

               Amen! whatever fate be sent,--

               Pray God the heart may kindly glow,

               Although the heart with cares be bent,

               And whitened with the winter-snow.

               Come wealth or want, come good or ill,

               Let young and old accept their part,

               And bow before the Awful Will,

               And bear it with an honest heart.

               Who misses, or who wins the prize?

               Go, lose or conquer as you can:

               But if you fail, or if you rise,

               Be each, pray God, a gentleman,

               A gentleman, or old or young!

               (Bear kindly with my humble lays);

               The sacred chorus first was sung

               Upon the first of Christmas-days:

               The shepherds heard it overhead--

               The joyful angels raised it then:

               Glory to Heaven 011 high, it said,

               And peace 011 earth to gentle men.

               My song, save this, is little worth;

               I lay the weary pen aside,

               And wish you health, and love, and mirth,

               As fits the solemn Christmas-tide.

               As fits the holy Christmas birth,

               Be this, good friends, our carol still--

               Be peace on earth, be peace on earth,

               To men of gentle will.

THE END.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Doctor Birch and His Young Friends, by 
M. A. Titmarsh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOCTOR BIRCH AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS ***

***** This file should be named 45554-8.txt or 45554-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/5/5/45554/

Produced by David Widger from page images generously
provided by the Internet Archive


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
