The Project Gutenberg EBook of On Secret Service, by William Nelson Taft

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: On Secret Service
       Detective-Mystery Stories Based on Real Cases Solved By
       Government Agents

Author: William Nelson Taft

Release Date: November 25, 2011 [EBook #38131]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON SECRET SERVICE ***




Produced by David Edwards, JoAnn Greenwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






[Transcriber's Note: These stories have introductions which end with
thought breaks, sometimes with a closing quotation mark from the
storyteller. When the storyteller continues the story after the thought
break, opening quotation marks are consistently omitted.

Remaining transcriber's notes are located at the end of the text.]


[Cover Illustration: On Secret Service,
William Nelson Taft]




ON SECRET SERVICE

[Decoration]




    ON SECRET SERVICE

    _Detective-Mystery Stories
    Based on Real Cases Solved
    By Government Agents_

    BY
    WILLIAM NELSON TAFT

    [Illustration]

    HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
    NEW YORK AND LONDON


       *       *       *       *       *


    ON SECRET SERVICE

    Copyright, 1921, by Harper & Brothers
    Printed in the United States of America


       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


                                                  PAGE

        I. A FLASH IN THE NIGHT                      1

       II. THE MINT MYSTERY                         15

      III. THE YPIRANGA CASE                        28

       IV. THE CLUE ON SHELF 45                     42

        V. PHYLLIS DODGE, SMUGGLER EXTRAORDINARY    57

       VI. A MATTER OF RECORD                       73

      VII. THE SECRET STILL                         88

     VIII. THE TAXICAB TANGLE                      103

       IX. A MATCH FOR THE GOVERNMENT              118

        X. THE GIRL AT THE SWITCHBOARD             133

       XI. "LOST--$100,000!"                       149

      XII. "THE DOUBLE CODE"                       164

     XIII. THE TRAIL OF THE WHITE MICE             180

      XIV. WAH LEE AND THE FLOWER OF HEAVEN        195

       XV. THE MAN WITH THREE WIVES                210

      XVI. AFTER SEVEN YEARS                       225

     XVII. THE POISON-PEN PUZZLE                   239

    XVIII. THIRTY THOUSAND YARDS OF SILK           254

      XIX. THE CLUE IN THE CLASSIFIED COLUMN       268

       XX. IN THE SHADOW OF THE CAPITOL            283

      XXI. A MILLION-DOLLAR QUARTER                298

     XXII. "THE LOOTING OF THE C. T. C."           313

    XXIII. THE CASE OF MRS. ARMITAGE               328

     XXIV. FIVE INCHES OF DEATH                    343




ON SECRET SERVICE




I

A FLASH IN THE NIGHT


We were sitting in the lobby of the Willard, Bill Quinn and I, watching
the constant stream of politicians, pretty women, and petty office
seekers who drift constantly through the heart of Washington.

Suddenly, under his breath, I heard Quinn mutter, "Hello!" and,
following his eyes, I saw a trim, dapper, almost effeminate-looking chap
of about twenty-five strolling through Peacock Alley as if he didn't
have a care in the world.

"What's the matter?" I inquired. "Somebody who oughtn't to be here?"

"Not at all. He's got a perfect right to be anywhere he pleases, but I
didn't know he was home. Last time I heard of him he was in Seattle,
mixed up with those riots that Ole Hanson handled so well."

"Bolshevist?"

"Hardly," and Quinn smiled. "Don't you know Jimmy Callahan? Well, it's
scarcely the province of a Secret Service man to impress his face upon
everyone ... the secret wouldn't last long. No, Jimmy was working on the
other end of the Seattle affair. Trying to locate the men behind the
move--and I understand he did it fairly well, too. But what else would
you expect from the man who solved that submarine tangle in Norfolk?"

Quinn must have read the look of interest in my face, for he continued,
almost without a pause: "Did you ever hear the inside of that case? One
of the most remarkable in the whole history of the Secret Service, and
that's saying a good deal. I don't suppose it would do any harm to spill
it, so let's move over there in a corner and I'll relate a few details
of a case where the second hand of a watch played a leading role."

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole thing started back in the spring of 1918 [said Quinn, who held
down a soft berth in the Treasury Department as a reward for a game leg
obtained during a counterfeiting raid on Long Island].

Along about then, if you remember, the Germans let loose a lot of
boasting statements as to what they were going to do to American ships
and American shipping. Transports were going to be sunk, commerce
crippled and all that sort of thing. While not a word of it got into the
papers, there were a bunch of people right here in Washington who took
these threats seriously--for the Hun's most powerful weapon appeared to
be in his submarines, and if a fleet of them once got going off the
coast we'd lose a lot of valuable men and time landing them.

Then came the sinking of the _Carolina_ and those other ships off the
Jersey coast. Altogether it looked like a warm summer.

One afternoon the Chief sent for Callahan, who'd just come back from
taking care of some job down on the border, and told him his troubles.

"Jimmy," said the Chief, "somebody on this side is giving those damn
Huns a whole lot of information that they haven't any business getting.
You know about those boats they've sunk already, of course. They're
only small fry. What they're laying for is a transport, another
_Tuscania_ that they can stab in the dark and make their getaway. The
point that's worrying us is that the U-boats must be getting their
information from some one over here. The sinking of the _Carolina_
proves that. No submarine, operating on general cruising orders, could
possibly have known when that ship was due or what course she was going
to take. Every precaution was taken at San Juan to keep her sailing a
secret, but of course you can't hide every detail of that kind. She got
out. Some one saw her, wired the information up the coast here and the
man we've got to nab tipped the U-boat off.

"Of course we could go at it from Porto Rico, but that would mean
wasting a whole lot more time than we can afford. It's not so much a
question of the other end of the cable as it is who transmitted the
message to the submarine--and how!

"It's your job to find out before they score a real hit."

Callahan, knowing the way things are handled in the little suite on the
west side of the Treasury Building, asked for the file containing the
available information and found it very meager indeed.

Details of the sinking of the _Carolina_ were included, among them the
fact that the _U-37_ had been waiting directly in the path of the
steamer, though the latter was using a course entirely different from
the one the New York and Porto Rico S. S. Company's boats generally
took. The evidence of a number of passengers was that the submarine
didn't appear a bit surprised at the size of her prey, but went about
the whole affair in a businesslike manner. The meat of the report was
contained in the final paragraph, stating that one of the German
officers had boasted that they "would get a lot more ships in the same
way," adding, "Don't worry--we'll be notified when they are going to
sail."

Of course, Callahan reasoned, this might be simply a piece of Teutonic
bravado--but there was more than an even chance that it was the truth,
particularly when taken in conjunction with the sinking of the _Texel_
and the _Pinar del Rio_ and the fact that the _Carolina's_ course was so
accurately known.

But how in the name of Heaven had they gotten their information?

Callahan knew that the four principal ports of embarkation for
troops--Boston, New York, Norfolk, and Charleston--were shrouded in a
mantle of secrecy which it was almost impossible to penetrate. Some
months before, when he had been working on the case which grew out of
the disappearance of the plans of the battleship _Pennsylvania_, he had
had occasion to make a number of guarded inquiries in naval circles in
New York, and he recalled that it had been necessary not only to show
his badge, but to submit to the most searching scrutiny before he was
allowed to see the men he wished to reach. He therefore felt certain
that no outsider could have dug up the specific information in the short
space of time at their disposal.

But, arguing that it had been obtained, the way in which it had been
passed on to the U-boat also presented a puzzle.

Was there a secret submarine base on the coast?

Had some German, more daring than the rest, actually come ashore and
penetrated into the very lines of the Service?

Had he laid a plan whereby he could repeat this operation as often as
necessary?

Or did the answer lie in a concealed wireless, operating upon
information supplied through underground channels?

These were only a few of the questions which raced through Callahan's
mind. The submarine base he dismissed as impracticable. He knew that the
_Thor_, the _Unita_, the _Macedonia_, and nine other vessels had, at the
beginning of the war, cleared from American ports under false papers
with the intention of supplying German warships with oil, coal, and
food. He also knew that, of the million and a half dollars' worth of
supplies, less than one-sixth had ever been transshipped. Therefore,
having failed so signally here, the Germans would hardly try the same
scheme again.

The rumor that German officers had actually come into New York, where
they were supposed to have been seen in a theater, was also rather
far-fetched. So the wireless theory seemed to be the most tenable. But
even a wireless cannot conceal its existence from the other stations
indefinitely. Of course, it was possible that it might be located on
some unfrequented part of the coast--but then how could the operator
obtain the information which he transmitted to the U-boat?

Callahan gave it up in despair--for that night. He was tired and he felt
that eight hours' sleep would do him more good than thrashing around
with a problem for which there appeared to be no solution; a problem
which, after all, he couldn't even be sure existed.

Maybe, he thought, drowsily, as he turned off the light--maybe the
German on the U-boat was only boasting, after all--or, maybe....

The first thing Jimmy did the next morning was to call upon the head of
the recently organized Intelligence Bureau of the War Department--not
the Intelligence Division which has charge of censorship and the
handling of news, but the bureau which bears the same relation to the
army that the Secret Service does to the Treasury Department.

"From what ports are transports sailing within the next couple of
weeks?" he inquired of the officer in charge.

"From Boston, New York, Norfolk, and Charleston," was the reply--merely
confirming Callahan's previous belief. He had hoped that the ground
would be more limited, because he wanted to have the honor of solving
this problem by himself, and it was hardly possible for him to cover the
entire Atlantic Coast.

"Where's the biggest ship sailing from?" was his next question.

"There's one that clears Norfolk at daylight on Monday morning with
twelve thousand men aboard...."

"Norfolk?" interrupted Callahan. "I thought most of the big ones left
from New York or Boston."

"So they do, generally. But these men are from Virginia and North
Carolina. Therefore it's easier to ship them right out of Norfolk--saves
time and congestion of the railroads. As it happens, the ship they're
going on is one of the largest that will clear for ten days or more. All
of the other big ones are on the other side."

"Then," cut in Callahan, "if the Germans wanted to make a ten-strike
they'd lay for that boat?"

"They sure would--and one torpedo well placed would make the _Tuscania_
look like a Sunday-school picnic. But what's the idea? Got a tip that
the Huns are going to try to grab her?"

"No, not a tip," Callahan called back over his shoulder, for he was
already halfway out of the door; "just a hunch--and I'm going to play it
for all it's worth!"

The next morning, safely ensconced at the Monticello under the name of
"Robert P. Oliver, of Williamsport, Pa." Callahan admitted to himself
that he was indeed working on nothing more than a "hunch," and not a
very well-defined one at that. The only point that appeared actually to
back up his theory that the information was coming from Norfolk was the
fact that the U-boat was known to be operating between New York and the
Virginia capes. New York itself was well guarded and the surrounding
country was continually patrolled by operatives of all kinds. It was the
logical point to watch, and therefore it would be much more difficult to
obtain and transmit information there than it would be in the vicinity
of Norfolk, where military and naval operations were not conducted on as
large a scale nor with as great an amount of secrecy.

Norfolk, Callahan found, was rather proud of her new-found glory. For
years she had basked in the social prestige of the Chamberlin, the
annual gathering of the Fleet at Hampton Roads and the military pomp and
ceremony attendant upon the operations of Fortress Monroe. But the war
had brought a new thrill. Norfolk was now one of the principal ports of
embarkation for the men going abroad. Norfolk had finally taken her rank
with New York and Boston--the rank to which her harbor entitled her.

Callahan reached Norfolk on Wednesday morning. The _America_, according
to the information he had received from the War Department, would clear
at daybreak Monday--but at noon on Saturday the Secret Service operative
had very little more knowledge than when he arrived. He had found that
there was a rumor to the effect that two U-boats were waiting off the
Capes for the transport, which, of course, would have the benefit of the
usual convoy.

"But," as one army officer phrased it, "what's the use of a convoy if
they know just where you are? Germany would willingly lose a sub. or two
to get us, and, with the sea that's been running for the past ten days,
there'd be no hope of saving more than half the boys."

Spurred by the rapidity with which time was passing and the fact that he
sensed a thrill of danger--an intuition of impending peril--around the
_America_, Callahan spent the better part of Friday night and all
Saturday morning running down tips that proved to be groundless. A man
with a German name was reported to be working in secret upon some
invention in an isolated house on Willoughby Spit; a woman, concerning
whom little was known, had been seen frequently in the company of two
lieutenants slated to sail on the _America_; a house in Newport News
emitted strange "clacking" sounds at night.

But the alleged German proved to be a photographer of unassailable
loyalty, putting in extra hours trying to develop a new process of color
printing. The woman came from one of the oldest families in Richmond and
had known the two lieutenants for years. The house in Newport News
proved to be the residence of a young man who hoped some day to sell a
photoplay scenario, the irregular clacking noise being made by a
typewriter operated none too steadily.

"That's what happens to most of the 'clues' that people hand you,"
Callahan mused as he sat before his open window on Saturday evening,
with less than thirty-six hours left before the _America_ was scheduled
to leave. "Some fellows have luck with them, but I'll be hanged if I
ever did. Here I'm working in the dark on a case that I'm not even
positive exists. That infernal submarine may be laying off Boston at
this minute, waiting for the ship that leaves there Tuesday. Maybe they
don't get any word from shore at all.... Maybe they just...."

But here he was brought up with a sudden jar that concentrated all his
mental faculties along an entirely different road.

Gazing out over the lights of the city, scarcely aware that he saw them,
his subconscious mind had been following for the past three minutes
something apparently usual, but in reality entirely out of the ordinary.

"By George!" he muttered, "I wonder...."

Then, taking his watch from his pocket, his eyes alternated between a
point several blocks distant--a point over the roofs of the houses--and
the second hand of his timepiece. Less than a minute elapsed before he
reached for a pencil and commenced to jot down dots and dashes on the
back of an envelope. When, a quarter of an hour later, he found that the
dashes had become monotonous--as he expected they would--he reached for
the telephone and asked to be connected with the private wire of the
Navy Department in Washington.

"Let me speak to Mr. Thurber at once," he directed. "Operative Callahan,
S. S., speaking.... Hello! that you, Thurber?... This is Callahan. I'm
in Norfolk and I want to know whether you can read this code. You can
figure it out if anybody can. Ready?... Dash, dash, dash, dot, dash,
dash, dot--" and he continued until he had repeated the entire series of
symbols that he had plucked out of the night.

"Sounds like a variation of the International Morse," came the comment
from the other end of the wire--from Thurber, librarian of the Navy
Department and one of the leading American authorities on code and
ciphers. "May take a little time to figure it out, but it doesn't look
difficult. Where can I reach you?"

"I'm at the Monticello--name of Robert P. Oliver. Put in a call for me
as soon as you see the light on it. I've got something important to do
right now," and he hung up without another word.

A quick grab for his hat, a pat under his arm, to make sure that the
holster holding the automatic was in place, and Callahan was on his way
downstairs.

Once in the street, he quickened his pace and was soon gazing skyward at
the corner of two deserted thoroughfares not many blocks from the
Monticello. A few minutes' consultation with his watch confirmed his
impression that everything was right again and he commenced his search
for the night watchman.

"Who," he inquired of that individual, "has charge of the operation of
that phonograph sign on the roof?"

"Doan know fuh certain, suh, but Ah think it's operated by a man down
the street a piece. He's got charge of a bunch of them sort o' things.
Mighty funny kinder way to earn a livin', Ah calls it--flashing on an'
off all night long...."

"But where's he work from?" interrupted Callahan, fearful that the
negro's garrulousness might delay him unduly.

"Straight down this street three blocks, suh. Then turn one block to yo'
left and yo' cain't miss the place. Electrical Advertisin' Headquarters
they calls it. Thank you, suh," and Callahan was gone almost before the
watchman could grasp the fact that he held a five-dollar bill instead of
a dollar, as he thought.

It didn't take the Secret Service man long to locate the place he
sought, and on the top floor he found a dark, swarthy individual bending
over the complicated apparatus which operated a number of the electric
signs throughout the city. Before the other knew it, Callahan was in the
room--his back to the door and his automatic ready for action.

"Up with your hands!" snapped Callahan. "Higher! That's better. Now tell
me where you got that information you flashed out to sea to-night by
means of that phonograph sign up the street. Quick! I haven't any time
to waste."

"_Si, si, señor_," stammered the man who faced him. "But I understand
not the English very well."

"All right," countered Callahan. "Let's try it in Spanish," and he
repeated his demands in that language.

Volubly the Spaniard--or Mexican, as he later turned out to
be--maintained that he had received no information, nor had he
transmitted any. He claimed his only duty was to watch the "drums" which
operated the signs mechanically.

"No drum in the world could make that sign flash like it did to-night,"
Callahan cut in. "For more than fifteen minutes you sent a variation of
the Morse code seaward. Come on--I'll give you just one minute to tell
me, or I'll bend this gun over your head."

Before the minute had elapsed, the Mexican commenced his confession. He
had been paid a hundred dollars a week, he claimed, to flash a certain
series of signals every Saturday night, precisely at nine o'clock. The
message itself--a series of dots and dashes which he produced from his
pocket as evidence of his truthfulness--had reached him on Saturday
morning for the two preceding weeks. He didn't know what it meant. All
he did was to disconnect the drum which operated the sign and move the
switch himself. Payment for each week's work, he stated, was inclosed
with the next week's message. Where it came from he didn't know, but the
envelope was postmarked Washington.

With his revolver concealed in his coat pocket, but with its muzzle in
the small of the Mexican's back, Callahan marched his captive back to
the hotel and up into his room. As he opened the door the telephone rang
out, and, ordering the other to stand with his face to the wall in a
corner--"and be damn sure not to make a move"--the government agent
answered the call. As he expected, it was Thurber.

"The code's a cinch," came the voice over the wire from Washington. "But
the message is infernally important. It's in German, and evidently you
picked it up about two sentences from the start. The part you gave me
states that the transport _America_, with twelve thousand men aboard,
will leave Norfolk at daylight Monday. The route the ship will take is
distinctly stated, as is the personnel of her convoy. Where'd you get
the message?"

"Flashes in the night," answered Callahan. "I noticed that an electric
sign wasn't behaving regularly--so I jotted down its signals and passed
them on to you. The next important point is whether the message is
complete enough for you to reconstruct the code. Have you got all the
letters?"

"Yes, every one of them."

"Then take down this message, put it into that dot-and-dash code and
send it to me by special messenger on one of the navy torpedo boats
to-night. It's a matter of life and death to thousands of men!" and
Callahan dictated three sentences over the wire. "Got that?" he
inquired. "Good! Get busy and hurry it down. I've got to have it in the
morning."

"Turn around," he directed the Mexican, as he replaced the receiver.
"Were you to send these messages only on Saturday night?"

"_Si, señor._ Save that I was told that there might be occasions when I
had to do the same thing on Sunday night, too."

"At nine o'clock?"

"_Si, señor._"

Callahan smiled. Things were breaking better than he had dared hope. It
meant that the U-boat would be watching for the signal the following
night. Then, with proper emphasis of the automatic, he gave the Mexican
his orders. He was to return to his office with Callahan and go about
his business as usual, with the certainty that if he tried any
foolishness the revolver could act more quickly than he. Accompanied by
the government agent, he was to come back to the Monticello and spend
the night in Callahan's room, remaining there until the next evening
when he would--promptly at nine o'clock and under the direction of an
expert in telegraphy--send the message which Callahan would hand him.

That's practically all there is to the story.

       *       *       *       *       *

"All?" I echoed, when Quinn paused. "What do you mean, 'all'? What was
the message Callahan sent? What happened to the Mexican? Who sent the
letter and the money from Washington?"

"Nothing much happened to the Mexican," replied my informant, with a
smile. "They found that he was telling the truth, so they just sent him
over the border with instructions not to show himself north of the Rio
Grande. As for the letter--that took the Post Office, the Department of
Justice, and the Secret Service the better part of three months to
trace. But they finally located the sender, two weeks after she (yes, it
was a woman, and a darned pretty one at that) had made her getaway. I
understand they got her in England and sentenced her to penal servitude
for some twenty years or more. In spite of the war, the Anglo-Saxon race
hasn't completely overcome its prejudice against the death penalty for
women."

"But the message Callahan sent?" I persisted.

"That was short and to the point. As I recall it, it ran something like
this: 'Urgent--Route of _America_ changed. She clears at daylight, but
takes a course exactly ten miles south of one previously stated. Be
there."

"The U-boat was there, all right. But so were four hydroplanes and half
a dozen destroyers, all carrying the Stars and Stripes!"




II

THE MINT MYSTERY


"Mr Drummond! Wire for Mr. Drummond! Mr. Drummond, please!"

It was the monotonous, oft-repeated call of a Western Union
boy--according to my friend Bill Quinn, formerly of the United States
Secret Service--that really was responsible for solving the mystery
which surrounded the disappearance of $130,000 in gold from the
Philadelphia Mint.

"The boy himself didn't have a thing to do with the gold or the finding
of it," admitted Quinn, "but his persistence was responsible for
locating Drummond, of the Secret Service, just as he was about to start
on a well-earned vacation in the Maine woods. Uncle Sam's sleuths don't
get any too much time off, you know, and a month or so in a part of the
world where they don't know anything about international intrigues and
don't care about counterfeiting is a blessing not to be despised.

"That's the reason the boy had to be persistent when he was paging
Drummond.

"The operative had a hunch that it was a summons to another case and he
was dog tired. But the boy kept singing out the name through the train
and finally landed his man, thus being indirectly responsible for the
solution of a mystery that might have remained unsolved for weeks--and
incidentally saved the government nearly every cent of the one hundred
and thirty thousand dollars."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Drummond opened the telegram [continued Quinn] he found that it was
a summons to Philadelphia, signed by Hamlin, Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury.

"Preston needs you at once. Extremely important," read the wire--and, as
Drummond was fully aware that Preston was Director of the United States
Mint, it didn't take much deduction to figure that something had gone
wrong in the big building on Spring Garden Street where a large part of
the country's money is coined.

But even the lure of the chase--something you read a lot about in
detective stories, but find too seldom in the real hard work of tracing
criminals--did not offset Drummond's disappointment in having to defer
his vacation. Grumbling, he gathered his bags and cut across New York to
the Pennsylvania Station, where he was fortunate enough to be able to
make a train on the point of leaving for Philadelphia. At the Mint he
found Director Preston and Superintendent Bosbyshell awaiting him.

"Mr. Hamlin wired that he had instructed you to come up at once," said
the director. "But we had hardly hoped that you could make it so soon."

"Wire reached me on board a train that would have pulled out of Grand
Central Station in another three minutes," growled Drummond. "I was on
my way to Maine to forget all about work for a month. But," and his face
broke into a smile, "since they did find me, what's the trouble?"

"Trouble enough," replied the director. "Some hundred and thirty
thousand dollars in gold is missing from the Mint!"

"What!" Even Drummond was shaken out of his professional calm, not to
mention his grouch. Robbery of the United States Treasury or one of the
government Mints was a favorite dream with criminals, but--save for the
memorable occasion when a gang was found trying to tunnel under
Fifteenth Street in Washington--there had been no time when the scheme
was more than visionary.

"Are you certain? Isn't there any chance for a mistake?"

The questions were perfunctory, rather than hopeful.

"Unfortunately, not the least," continued Preston. "Somebody has made
away with a hundred and thirty thousand dollars worth of the
government's money. Seven hundred pounds of gold is missing and there
isn't a trace to show how or where it went. The vault doors haven't been
tampered with. The combination of the grille inside the vault is intact.
Everything, apparently, is as it should be--but fifty bars of gold are
missing."

"And each bar," mused Drummond, "weighs--"

"Fourteen pounds," cut in the superintendent.

Drummond looked at him in surprise.

"I beg your pardon," said Preston. "This is Mr. Bosbyshell,
superintendent of the Mint. This thing has gotten on my nerves so that I
didn't have the common decency to introduce you. Mr. Bosbyshell was with
me when we discovered that the gold was missing."

"When was that?"

"Yesterday afternoon," replied the director. "Every now and then--at
irregular intervals--we weigh all the gold in the Mint, to make sure
that everything is as it should be. Nothing wrong was discovered until
we reached Vault Six, but there fifty bars were missing. There wasn't
any chance of error. The records showed precisely how much should have
been there and the scales showed how much there was, to the fraction of
an ounce.

"But even if we had only counted the bars, instead of weighing each one
separately, the theft would have been instantly discovered, for the
vault contained exactly fifty bars less than it should have. It was then
that I wired Washington and asked for assistance from the Secret
Service."

"Thus spoiling my vacation," muttered Drummond. "How many men know the
combination to the vault door?"

"Only two," replied the superintendent. "Cochrane, who is the official
weigher, and myself. Cochrane is above suspicion. He's been here for the
past thirty years and there hasn't been a single complaint against him
in all that time."

Drummond looked as if he would like to ask Preston if the same could be
said for the superintendent, but he contented himself with listening as
Bosbyshell continued:

"But even if Cochrane or I--yes, I'm just as much to be suspected as
he--could have managed to open the vault door unseen, we could not have
gotten inside the iron grille which guards the gold in the interior of
the vault. That is always kept locked, with a combination known to two
other men only. There's too much gold in each one of these vaults to
take any chance with, which is the reason for this double protection.
Two men--Cochrane and I--handle the combination to the vault door and
open it whenever necessary. Two others--Jamison and Strubel--are the
only ones that know how to open the grille door. One of them has to be
present whenever the bars are put in or taken away, for the men who can
get inside the vault cannot enter the grille, and the men who can
manipulate the grille door can't get into the vault."

"It certainly sounds like a burglar-proof combination," commented
Drummond. "Is there any possibility for conspiracy between"--and he
hesitated for the fraction of a second--"between Cochrane and either of
the men who can open the grille door?"

"Apparently not the least in the world," replied Preston. "So far as we
know they are all as honest as the day--"

"But the fact remains," Drummond interrupted, "that the gold is
missing."

"Exactly--but the grille door was sealed with the official governmental
stamp when we entered the vault yesterday. That stamp is applied only in
the presence of both men who know the combination. So the conspiracy, if
there be any, must have included Cochrane, Strubel, and Jamison--instead
of being a two-man job."

"How much gold did you say was missing?" inquired the Treasury
operative, taking another tack.

"Seven hundred pounds--fifty bars of fourteen pounds each," answered
Bosbyshell. "That's another problem that defies explanation. How could
one man carry away all that gold without being seen? He'd need a dray to
cart it off, and we're very careful about what goes out of the Mint.
There's a guard at the front door all the time, and no one is allowed to
leave with a package of any kind until it has been examined and passed."

A grunt was Drummond's only comment--and those who knew the Secret
Service man best would have interpreted the sound to mean studious
digestion of facts, rather than admission of even temporary defeat.

It was one of the government detective's pet theories that every crime,
no matter how puzzling, could be solved by application of common-sense
principles and the rules of logic. "The criminal with brains," he was
fond of saying, "will deliberately try to throw you off the scent. Then
you've got to take your time and separate the wheat from the chaff--the
false leads from the true. But the man who commits a crime on the spur
of the moment--or who flatters himself that he hasn't left a single clue
behind--is the one who's easy to catch. The cleverest crook in the world
can't enter a room without leaving his visiting card in some way or
other. It's up to you to find that card and read the name on it. And
common sense is the best reading glass."

Requesting that his mission be kept secret, Drummond said that he would
like to examine Vault No. Six.

"Let Cochrane open the vault for me and then have Jamison and Strubel
open the grille," he directed.

"Unless Mr. Bosbyshell opened the vault door," Preston reminded him,
"there's no one but Cochrane who could do it. It won't be necessary,
however, to have either of the others open the grille--the door was
taken from its hinges this morning in order the better to examine the
place and it hasn't yet been replaced."

"All right," agreed Drummond. "Let's have Cochrane work the outer
combination, then. I'll have a look at the other two later."

Accompanied by the director and the superintendent, Drummond made his
way to the basement where they were joined by the official weigher, a
man well over fifty, who was introduced by Preston to "Mr. Drummond, a
visitor who is desirous of seeing the vaults."

"I understand that you are the only man who can open them," said the
detective. "Suppose we look into this one," as he stopped, as if by
accident, before Vault No. 6.

Cochrane, without a word, bent forward and commenced to twirl the
combination. A few spins to the right, a few to the left, back to the
right, to the left once more--and he pulled at the heavy door
expectantly. But it failed to budge.

Again he bent over the combination, spinning it rapidly. Still the door
refused to open.

"I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to help me with this, Superintendent,"
Cochrane said, finally. "It doesn't seem to work, somehow."

But, under Bosbyshell's manipulation, the door swung back almost
instantly.

"Nothing wrong with the combination," commented Preston.

Drummond smiled. "Has the combination been changed recently?" he asked.

"Not for the past month," Bosbyshell replied. "We usually switch all of
them six times a year, just as a general precaution--but this has been
the same for the past few weeks. Ever since the fifteenth of last month,
to be precise."

Inside the vault Drummond found that, as Preston had stated, the door to
the grille had been taken from its hinges, to facilitate the work of the
men who had weighed the gold, and had not been replaced.

"Where are the gold bars?" asked the detective. "The place looks like it
had been well looted."

"They were all taken out this morning, to be carefully weighed," was
Preston's reply.

"I'd like to see some of them stacked up there along the side of the
grille, if it isn't too much trouble."

"Surely," said Bosbyshell. "I'll have the men bring them in at once."

As soon as the superintendent had left the room, Drummond requested that
the door of the grille be placed in its usual position, and Cochrane set
it up level with the floor, leaning against the supports at the side.

"Is that the way it always stays?" inquired the Secret Service man.

"No, sir, but it's pretty heavy to handle, and I thought you just wanted
to get a general idea of things."

"I'd like to see it in place, if you don't mind. Here, I'll help you
with it--but we better slip our coats off, for it looks like a
man's-sized job," and he removed his coat as he spoke.

After Cochrane had followed his example, the two of them hung the heavy
door from its hinges and stepped back to get the effect. But Drummond's
eyes were fixed, not upon the entrance to the grille, but on the middle
of Cochrane's back, and, when the opportunity offered an instant later,
he shifted his gaze to the waist of the elder man's trousers. Something
that he saw there caused the shadow of a smile to flit across his face.

"Thanks," he said. "That will do nicely," and he made a quick gesture to
Preston that he would like to have Cochrane leave the vault.

"Very much obliged, Mr. Cochrane," said the director. "We won't bother
you any more. You might ask those men to hurry in with the bars, if you
will."

And the weigher, pausing only to secure his coat, left the vault.

"Why all the stage setting?" inquired Preston. "You don't suspect...."

"I don't suspect a thing," Drummond smiled, searching for his own coat,
"beyond the fact that the solution to the mystery is so simple as to be
almost absurd. By the way, have you noticed those scratches on the bars
of the grille, about four feet from the floor?"

"No, I hadn't," admitted the director. "But what of them? These vaults
aren't new, you know, and I dare say you'd find similar marks on the
grille bars in any of the others."

"I hope not," Drummond replied, grimly, "for that would almost
certainly mean a shortage of gold in other sections of the Mint.
Incidentally, has all the rest of the gold been weighed?"

"Every ounce of it."

"Nothing missing?"

"Outside of the seven hundred pounds from this vault, not a particle."

"Good--then I'll be willing to lay a small wager that you can't find the
duplicates of these scratches anywhere else in the Mint." And Drummond
smiled at the director's perplexity.

When the men arrived with a truck loaded with gold bars, they stacked
them--at the superintendent's direction--along the side of the grille
nearest the vault entrance.

"Is that the way they are usually arranged?" inquired Drummond.

"Yes--the grille bars are of tempered steel and the openings between
them are too small to permit anyone to put his hand through. Therefore,
as we are somewhat pressed for space, we stack them up right along the
outer wall of the grille and then work back. It saves time and labor in
bringing them in."

"Is this the way the door of the grille ordinarily hangs?"

Bosbyshell inspected it a moment before he replied.

"Yes," he said. "It appears to be all right. It was purposely made to
swing clear of the floor and the ceiling so that it might not become
jammed. The combination and the use of the seal prevents its being
opened by anyone who has no business in the grille."

"And the seal was intact when you came in yesterday afternoon?"

"It was."

"Thanks," said Drummond; "that was all I wanted to know," and he made
his way upstairs with a smile which seemed to say that his vacation in
the Maine woods had not been indefinitely postponed.

Once back in the director's office, the government operative asked
permission to use the telephone, and, calling the Philadelphia office of
the Secret Service, requested that three agents be assigned to meet him
down town as soon as possible.

"Have you a record of the home address of the people employed in the
Mint?" Drummond inquired of the director, as he hung up the receiver.

"Surely," said Preston, producing a typewritten list from the drawer of
his desk.

"I'll borrow this for a while, if I may. I'll probably be back with it
before three o'clock--and bring some news with me, too," and the
operative was out of the room before Preston could frame a single
question.

As a matter of fact, the clock in the director's office pointed to
two-thirty when Drummond returned, accompanied by the three men who had
been assigned to assist him.

"Have you discovered anything?" Preston demanded.

"Let's have Cochrane up here first," Drummond smiled. "I can't be
positive until I've talked to him. You might have the superintendent in,
too. He'll be interested in developments, I think."

Bosbyshell was the first to arrive, and, at Drummond's request, took up
a position on the far side of the room. As soon as he had entered, two
of the other Secret Service men ranged themselves on the other side of
the doorway and, the moment Cochrane came in, closed the door behind
him.

"Cochrane," said Drummond, "what did you do with the seven hundred
pounds of gold that you took from Vault No. Six during the past few
weeks?"

"What--what--" stammered the weigher.

"There's no use bluffing," continued the detective. "We've got the goods
on you. The only thing missing is the gold itself, and the sooner you
turn it over the more lenient the government will be with you. I know
how you got the bars out of the grille--a piece of bent wire was
sufficient to dislodge them from the top of the pile nearest the grille
bars and it was easy to slip them under the door. No wonder the seal was
never tampered with. It wasn't necessary for you to go inside the grille
at all.

"But, more than that, I know how you carried the bars, one at a time,
out of the Mint. It took these three men less than an hour this
afternoon to find the tailor who fixed the false pocket in the front of
your trousers--the next time you try a job of this kind you better
attend to all these details yourself--and it needed only one look at
your suspenders this morning to see that they were a good deal wider and
heavier than necessary. That long coat you are in the habit of wearing
is just the thing to cover up any suspicious bulge in your garments and
the guard at the door, knowing you, would never think of telling you to
stop unless you carried a package or something else contrary to orders.

"The people in your neighborhood say that they've seen queer bluish
lights in the basement of your house on Woodland Avenue. So I suspect
you've been melting that gold up and hiding it somewhere, ready for a
quick getaway.

"Yes, Cochrane, we've got the goods on you and if you want to save half
of a twenty-year sentence--which at your age means life--come across
with the information. Where is the gold?"

"In the old sewer pipe," faltered the weigher, who appeared to have aged
ten years while Drummond was speaking. "In the old sewer pipe that
leads from my basement."

"Good!" exclaimed Drummond. "I think Mr. Preston will use his influence
with the court to see that your sentence isn't any heavier than
necessary. It's worth that much to guard the Mint against future losses
of the same kind, isn't it, Mr. Director?"

"It surely is," replied Preston. "But how in the name of Heaven did you
get the answer so quickly?"

Drummond delayed his answer until Cochrane, accompanied by the three
Secret Service men, had left the room. Then--

"Nothing but common sense," he said. "You remember those scratches I
called your attention to--the ones on the side of the grille bars? They
were a clear indication of the way in which the gold had been taken from
the grille--knocked down from the top of the pile with a piece of wire
and pulled under the door of the grille. That eliminated Jamison and
Strubel immediately. They needn't have gone to that trouble, even if it
had been possible for them to get into the vault in the first place.

"But I had my suspicions of Cochrane when he was unable to open the
vault door. That pointed to nervousness, and nervousness indicated a
guilty conscience. I made the hanging of the grille door an excuse to
get him to shed his coat--though I did want to see whether the door came
all the way down to the floor--and I noted that his suspenders were very
broad and his trousers abnormally wide around the waist. He didn't want
to take any chances with that extra fourteen pounds of gold, you know.
It would never do to drop it in the street.

"The rest is merely corroborative. I found that bluish lights had been
observed in the basement of Cochrane's house, and one of my men located
the tailor who had enlarged his trousers. That's really all there was
to it."

With that Drummond started to the door, only to be stopped by Director
Preston's inquiry as to where he was going.

"On my vacation, which you interrupted this morning," replied the Secret
Service man.

"It's a good thing I did," Preston called after him. "If Cochrane had
really gotten away with that gold we might never have caught him."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Which," as Bill Quinn said, when he finished his narrative, "is the
reason I claim that the telegraph boy who persisted in paging Drummond
is the one who was really responsible for the saving of some hundred and
thirty thousand dollars that belonged to Uncle Sam."

"But, surely," I said, "that case was an exception. In rapidity of
action, I mean. Don't governmental investigations usually take a long
time?"

"Frequently," admitted Quinn, "they drag on and on for months--sometimes
years. But it's seldom that Uncle Sam fails to land his man--even though
the trail leads into the realms of royalty, as in the Ypiranga case.
That happened before the World War opened, but it gave the State
Department a mighty good line on what to expect from Germany."




III

THE YPIRANGA CASE


"Mexico," said Bill Quinn, who now holds a soft berth in the Treasury
Department by virtue of an injury received in the line of duty--during a
raid on counterfeiters a few years ago, to be precise--"is back on the
first page of the papers again after being crowded off for some four
years because of the World War. Funny coincidence, that, when you
remember that it was this same Mexico that gave us our first indication
of the way we might expect Germany to behave."

"Huh?" I said, a bit startled. "What do you mean? The first spark of the
war was kindled in Serbia, not Mexico. Outside of the rumblings of the
Algeciras case and one or two other minor affairs, there wasn't the
slightest indication of the conflict to come."

"No?" and Quinn's eyebrows went up in interrogation. "How about the
Ypiranga case?"

"The which?"

"The Ypiranga case--the one where Jack Stewart stumbled across a clue in
a Mexico City café which led all the way to Berlin and back to
Washington and threatened to precipitate a row before the Kaiser was
quite ready for it?"

"No," I admitted, "that's a page of underground history that I haven't
read--and I must confess that I don't know Stewart, either."

"Probably not," said the former Secret Service man. "He wasn't
connected with any of the branches of the government that get into print
very often. As a matter of fact, the very existence of the organization
to which he belonged isn't given any too much publicity. Everyone knows
of the Secret Service and the men who make the investigations for the
Department of Justice and the Post-office Department--but the Department
of State, for obvious reasons, conducts its inquiries in a rather more
diplomatic manner. Its agents have to pose as commercial investigators,
or something else equally as prosaic. Their salaries are, as a general
thing, paid out of the President's private allowance or out of the fund
given to the department 'for use as it may see fit.' Less than half a
dozen people know the actual status of the organization or the names of
its members at any one time, and its exploits are recorded only in the
archives of the State Department."

"But who," I persisted, as Quinn stopped, "was Jack Stewart and what was
the nature of the affair upon which he stumbled in Mexico City?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stewart [replied Quinn] was just a quiet, ordinary sort of chap, the
kind that you'd expect to find behind a desk in the State Department,
sorting out consular reports and handling routine stuff. Nothing
exceptional about him at all--which was probably one reason for his
being selected for work as a secret agent of the Department. It doesn't
do, you know, to pick men who are conspicuous, either in their dress or
manner. Too easy to spot and remember them. The chap who's swallowed up
in the crowd is the one who can get by with a whole lot of quiet work
without being suspected.

When they sent Jack down to Mexico they didn't have the slightest idea
he'd uncover anything as big as he did. The country south of the Rio
Grande, if you recall, had been none too quiet for some time prior to
1914. Taft had had his troubles with it ever since the end of the Diaz
regime, and when Wilson came in the "Mexican question" was a legacy that
caused the men in the State Department to spend a good many sleepless
nights.

All sorts of rumors, most of them wild and bloody, floated up through
official and unofficial channels. The one fact that seemed to be certain
was that Mexico was none too friendly to the United States, and that
some other nation was behind this feeling, keeping it constantly stirred
up and overlooking no opportunity to add fuel to the flame. Three or
four other members of the State Department's secret organization had
been wandering around picking up leads for some months past and, upon
the return of one of these to Washington, Stewart was sent to replace
him.

His instructions were simple and delightfully indefinite. He was to
proceed to Mexico City, posing as the investigator for a financial house
in New York which was on the lookout for a soft concession from the
Mexican government. This would give him an opportunity to seek the
acquaintance of Mexican officials and lend an air of plausibility to
practically any line that he found it necessary to follow. But, once at
the capital with his alibis well established, he was to overlook nothing
which might throw light upon the question that had been bothering
Washington for some time past--just which one of the foreign powers was
fanning the Mexican unrest and to what lengths it was prepared to go?

Of course, the State Department suspected--just as we now know--that
Berlin was behind the movement, but at that time there was no indication
of the reason. In the light of later events, however, the plan is plain.
Germany, feeling certain that the greatest war Europe had ever known
was a matter of the immediate future, was laying her plans to keep other
nations out of the conflict. She figured that Mexico was the best foil
for the United States and that our pitifully small army would have its
hands full with troubles at home. If not, she intended to let Japan
enter into the equation--as shown by the Zimmerman note some two years
later.

When Stewart got to Mexico City, it did not take him long to discover
that there was an undercurrent of animosity to the United States which
made itself felt in numberless ways. Some of the Mexican papers,
apparently on a stronger financial basis than ever before, were
outspoken in their criticism of American dollars and American dealings.
The people as a whole, long dominated by Diaz, were being stirred to
resentment of the "Gringoes," who "sought to purchase the soul of a
nation as well as its mineral wealth." The improvements which American
capital had made were entirely overlooked, and the spotlight of
subsidized publicity was thrown upon the encroachments of the hated
Yankees.

All this Stewart reported to Washington, and in reply was politely
informed that, while interesting, it was hardly news. The State
Department had known all this for months. The question was: Where was
the money coming from and what was the immediate object of the game?

"Take your time and don't bother us unless you find something definite
to report," was the substance of the instructions cabled to Stewart.

The secret agent, therefore, contented himself with lounging around the
very inviting cafés of the Mexican capital and making friends with such
officials as might be able to drop scraps of information.

It was November when he first hit Mexico City. It was nearly the middle
of April before he picked up anything at all worth while. Of course, in
the meantime he had uncovered a number of leads--but every one of them
was blind. For a day or two, or a week at most, they would hold out
glowing promise of something big just around the corner. Then, when he
got to the end of the rainbow, he would find an empty pail in place of
the pot of gold he had hoped for.

It wasn't surprising, therefore, that Stewart was growing tired of the
life of continual mystery, of developments that never developed, of
secrets that were empty and surprises that faded away into nothing.

It was on the 13th of April, while seated at a little table in front of
a sidewalk café on the Calles de Victoria, that the American agent
obtained his first real clue to the impending disaster.

When two Mexicans whom he knew by sight, but not by name, sat down at a
table near his he pricked up his ears purely by instinct, rather than
through any real hope of obtaining information of value.

The arrival of the usual sugared drinks was followed by a few words of
guarded conversation, and then one of the Mexicans remarked, in a tone a
trifle louder than necessary, that "the United States is a nation of
cowardly women, dollar worshipers who are afraid to fight, and braggarts
who would not dare to back up their threats."

It was an effort for Stewart to remain immersed in the newspaper propped
up in front of him. Often as he had heard these sentiments expressed,
his Southern blood still rose involuntarily--until his logic reminded
him that his mission was not to start a quarrel, but to end one. He knew
that no good could ensue from his taking up the challenge, and the very
fact that the speaker had raised his voice gave him the tip that the
words were uttered for his especial benefit, to find out whether he
understood Spanish--for he made no attempt to disguise his nationality.

With a smile which did not show on his lips, Stewart summoned the waiter
and in atrocious Spanish ordered another glass of lemonade. His complete
knowledge of the language was the one thing which he had managed to keep
entirely under cover ever since reaching Mexico, for he figured that the
natives would speak more freely in his presence if they believed he
could not gather what they were discussing.

The trick worked to perfection.

"Pig-headed Yankee," commented the Mexican who had first spoken.
"Lemonade! Pah!--they haven't the nerve to take a man's drink!" and he
drained his glass of _pulque_ at a single gulp.

The other, who had not spoken above a whisper, raised his glass and
regarded it in silence for a moment. Then--"Prosit," he said, and drank.

"_Nom di Dio_," warned his companion. "Be careful! The American hog does
not speak Spanish well enough to understand those who use it fluently,
but he may speak German."

Stewart smothered a smile behind his paper. Spanish had always been a
hobby of his--but he only knew about three words in German!

"I understand," continued the Mexican, "that Victoriano is preparing for
the coup, just as I always figured he would" (Stewart knew that
"Victoriano" was the familiar form in which the populace referred to
Victoriano Huerta, self-appointed President of Mexico and the man who
had steadfastly defied the American government in every way possible,
taking care not to allow matters to reach such a hot stage that he could
handle them through diplomatic promises to see that things "improved in
the future").

"_El Presidente_ has always been careful to protect himself"--the
speaker went on--"but now that you have brought definite assurance from
our friends that the money and the arms will be forthcoming within the
fortnight there is nothing further to fear from the Yankee pigs. It will
be easy to stir up sentiment against them here overnight, and before
they can mass their handful of troops along the Rio Grande we will have
retaken Texas and wiped out the insult of 'forty-eight. What is the
latest news from the ship?"

"The ----?" inquired the man across the table, but his Teutonic
intonation of what was evidently a Spanish name was so jumbled that all
Stewart could catch was the first syllable--something that sounded like
"_Eep_."

"Is that the name?" asked the Mexican.

"Yes," replied the other. "She sailed from Hamburg on the seventh.
Allowing two weeks for the passage--she isn't fast, you know--that would
bring her into Vera Cruz about the twenty-first. Once there, the arms
can be landed and...."

The events of the next few minutes moved so rapidly that, when Stewart
had time to catch his breath, he found it difficult to reconstruct the
affair with accuracy.

He recalled that he had been so interested in the conversation at the
next table that he had failed to notice the approach of the only other
man he knew in the State Department's secret organization--Dawson, who
had been prowling around the West Coast on an errand similar to his.
Before he knew it Dawson had clapped him on the back and exclaimed:
"Hello, Jack! Didn't expect to see you here--thought you'd be looking
over things in the vicinity of the Palace."

The words themselves were innocent enough, but--they were spoken in
fluent, rapid Spanish and Stewart had shown that he understood!

"_Sapristi!_" hissed the Mexican. "Did you see?" and he bent forward to
whisper hurriedly to his companion.

Stewart recovered himself instantly, but the damage had been done.

"Hello, Dawson," he answered in English, trusting that the men at the
next table had not noted his slip. "Sit down and have something? Rotten
weather, isn't it? And not a lead in sight. These Mexicans seem to be
afraid to enter into any contract that ties them up more than a
year--and eighteen revolutions can happen in that time."

As Dawson seated himself, Stewart gave him a hasty sign to be careful.
Watching the Mexican and his companion out of the corner of his eye, he
steered the conversation into harmless channels, but a moment later the
pair at the next table called the waiter, gave some whispered
instructions, and left.

"What's the matter?" asked Dawson.

"Nothing--except that I involuntarily registered a knowledge of Spanish
when you spoke to me just now, and I've spent several months building up
a reputation for knowing less about the language than anyone in Mexico
City. As luck would have it, there was a couple seated at the next table
who were giving me what sounded like the first real dope I've had since
I got here. I'll tell you about it later. The question now is to get
back to the hotel before that precious pair get in their dirty work. A
code message to Washington is all I ask--but, if I'm not mistaken, we
are going to have our work cut out for us on the way back."

"Scott! Serious as that, is it?" muttered Dawson. "Well, there are two
of us and I'd like to see their whole dam' army try to stop us. Let's
go!"

"Wait a minute," counseled Stewart. "There's no real hurry, for they
wouldn't dare try to start anything in the open. In case we get
separated or--if anything should happen--wire the Department in code
that a vessel with a Spanish name--something that begins with 'Eep'--has
cleared Hamburg, loaded with guns and ammunition. Expected at Vera Cruz
about the twenty-first. Germany's behind the whole plot. Now I'll settle
up and we'll move."

But as he reached for his pocketbook a Mexican swaggering along the
sidewalk deliberately stumbled against his chair and sent him sprawling.
Dawson was on his feet in an instant, his fists clenched and ready for
action.

But Stewart had noted that the Mexican had three companions and that one
of the men who had occupied the adjoining table was watching the affair
from a vantage point half a block away.

With a leap that was catlike in its agility, Stewart seized the
swaggering native by the legs in a football tackle, and upset him
against his assistants.

"Quick, this way!" he called to Dawson, starting up the street away from
the watcher at the far corner. As he ran, his hand slipped into his coat
pocket where the small, but extremely efficient, automatic with which
all government agents are supplied usually rested. But the gun wasn't
there! Apparently it had slipped out in the scuffle a moment before.

Hardly had he realized that he was unarmed before he and Dawson were
confronted by five other natives coming from the opposite direction. The
meager lighting system of the Mexican capital, however, was rather a
help than a detriment, for in the struggle which followed it was
practically impossible to tell friend from foe. The two Americans,
standing shoulder to shoulder, had the added advantage of
teamwork--something which the natives had never learned.

"Don't use your gun if you can help it," Stewart warned. "We don't want
the police in on this!"

As he spoke his fist shot out and the leader of the attacking party
sprawled in the street. No sound came from Dawson, beyond a grunt, as he
landed on the man he had singled out of the bunch. The ten seconds that
followed were jammed with action, punctuated with the shrill cries for
reinforcements from the Mexicans, and brightened here and there by the
dull light from down the street which glinted off the long knives--the
favorite weapon of the Latin-American fighter.

Stewart and Dawson realized that they must not only fight, but fight
fast. Every second brought closer the arrival of help from the rear, but
Dawson waited until he could hear the reinforcements almost upon them
before he gave the word to break through. Then--

"Come on, Jack!" he called. "Let's go!"

Heads down, fists moving with piston-like precision, the two Americans
plowed their way through. Dawson swore later that he felt at least one
rib give under the impact of the blows and he knew that he nursed a sore
wrist for days, but Stewart claimed that his energies were concentrated
solely on the scrap and that he didn't have time to receive any
impression of what was going on. He knew that he had to fight his way
out--that it was essential for one of them to reach the telegraph office
or the embassy with the news they carried.

It was a case of fight like the devil and trust to luck and the darkness
for aid.

Almost before they knew it, they had broken through the trio in front of
them and had turned down the Calles Ancha, running in a form that would
have done credit to a college track team. Behind them they heard the
muffled oaths of their pursuers as they fell over the party they had
just left.

"They don't want to attract the police any more than we do," gasped
Dawson. "They don't dare shoot!"

But as he spoke there came the z-z-i-pp of a bullet, accompanied by the
sharp crack of a revolver somewhere behind them.

"Careful," warned Stewart. "We've got to skirt that street light ahead.
Duck and--"

But with that he crumpled up, a bullet through his hip.

Without an instant's hesitation Dawson stooped, swung his companion over
his shoulder, and staggered on, his right hand groping for his
automatic. Once out of the glare of the arc light, he felt that he would
be safe, at least for a moment.

Then, clattering toward them, he heard a sound that spelled safety--one
of the open nighthawk cabs that prowl around the streets of the Mexican
capital.

Shifting Stewart so that his feet rested on the ground, he wheeled and
raked the street behind him with a fusillade from his automatic. There
was only a dull mass of whitish clothing some fifty yards away at which
to aim, but he knew that the counter-attack would probably gain a few
precious seconds of time--time sufficient to stop the cab and to put his
plan into operation.

The moment the cab came into the circle of light from the street lamp
Dawson dragged his companion toward it, seized the horse's bridle with
his free hand and ordered the driver to halt.

Before the cabby had recovered his wits the two Americans were in the
vehicle and Dawson had his revolver pressed none too gently into the
small of the driver's back. The weapon was empty, but the Mexican
didn't know that, and he responded instantly to Dawson's order to turn
around and drive "as if seventy devils of Hades were after him!"

Outside of a few stray shots that followed as they disappeared up the
street, the drive to the Embassy was uneventful, and, once under the
shelter of the American flag, the rest was easy.

Stewart, it developed, had sustained only a flesh wound through the
muscles of his hip--painful, but not dangerous. Within ten minutes after
he had reached O'Shaughnessy's office he was dictating a code wire to
Washington--a cable which stated that a vessel with a Spanish name,
commencing with something that sounded like "Eep," had cleared Hamburg
on the seventh, loaded with arms and ammunition destined to advance the
interests of Mexican revolutionists and to hamper the efforts of the
United States to preserve order south of the border.

The wire reached Washington at noon of the following day and was
instantly transmitted to Berlin, with instructions to Ambassador Gerard
to look into the matter and report immediately.

     Vessel in question is probably the _Ypiranga_ [stated a code
     the following morning]. Cleared Hamburg on date mentioned,
     presumably loaded with grain. Rumors here of large shipment
     of arms to some Latin American republic. Practically certain
     that Wilhelmstrasse is behind the move, but impossible to
     obtain confirmation. Motive unknown.

Ten minutes after this message had been decoded the newspaper
correspondents at the White House noted that a special Cabinet meeting
had been called, but no announcement was made of its purpose or of the
business transacted, beyond the admission that "the insult to the flag
at Tampico had been considered."

Promptly at noon the great wireless station at Arlington flashed a
message to Admiral Mayo, in command of the squadron off the Mexican
coast. In effect, it read:

     Proceed immediately to Vera Cruz. Await arrival of steamer
     _Ypiranga_, loaded with arms. Prevent landing at any cost.
     Blockade upon pretext of recent insult to flag. Atlantic
     Fleet ordered to your support.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The rest of the story," concluded Quinn, "is a matter of history. How
the fleet bottled up the harbor at Vera Cruz, how it was forced to send
a landing party ashore under fire, and how seventeen American sailors
lost their lives during the guerrilla attack which followed. All that
was spread across the front pages of American papers in big black
type--but the fact that a steamer named the _Ypiranga_ had been held up
by the American fleet and forced to anchor at a safe distance offshore,
under the guns of the flagship, was given little space. Apparently it
was a minor incident--but in reality it was the crux of the whole
situation, an indication of Germany's rancor, which was to burst its
bounds before four months had passed, another case in which the arm of
Uncle Sam had been long enough to stretch halfway across a continent and
nip impending disaster."

"But," I inquired, as he paused, "what became of Dawson and Stewart?"

"That I don't know," replied Quinn. "The last time I heard of Jack he
had a captain's commission in France and was following up his feud with
the Hun that started in Mexico City four months before the rest of the
world dreamed of war. Dawson, I believe, is still in the Department, and
rendered valuable assistance in combating German propaganda in Chile and
Peru. He'll probably be rewarded with a consular job in some
out-of-the-way hole, for, now that the war is over, the organization to
which he belongs will gradually dwindle to its previous small
proportions.

"Strange, wasn't it, how that pair stumbled across one of the first
tentacles of the World War in front of a café in Mexico City? That's one
beauty of government detective work--you never know when the monotony is
going to be blown wide open by the biggest thing you ever happened upon.

"There was little Mary McNilless, who turned up the clue which prevented
an explosion, compared to which the Black Tom affair would have been a
Sunday-school party. She never dreamed that she would prevent the loss
of millions of dollars' worth of property and at least a score of lives,
but she did--without moving from her desk."

"How?" I asked.

But Quinn yawned, looked at his watch, and said: "That's entirely too
long a story to spin right now. It's past my bedtime, and Mrs. Quinn's
likely to be fussy if I'm not home by twelve at least. She says that now
I have an office job she can at least count on my being round to guard
the house--something that she never could do before. So let's leave Mary
for another time. Goodnight"--and he was off.




IV

THE CLUE ON SHELF 45


"Of course, it is possible that patriotism might have prompted Mary
McNilless to locate the clue which prevented an explosion that would
have seriously hampered the munitions industry of the United States--but
the fact remains that she did it principally because she was in love
with Dick Walters, and Dick happened to be in the Secret Service. It was
one case where Cupid scored over Mars."

Bill Quinn eased the game leg which he won as the trophy of a
counterfeiting raid some years before into a more comfortable position,
reached for his pipe and tobacco pouch, and settled himself for another
reminiscence of the Service with which he had formerly been actively
connected.

"Mary was--and doubtless still is--one of those red-headed, blue-eyed
Irish beauties whom nature has peppered with just enough freckles to
make them alluring, evidences that the sun itself couldn't help kissing
her. But, from all I've been able to gather, the sun was in a class by
itself. Until Dick Walters came upon the scene, Miss McNilless held
herself strictly aloof from masculine company and much preferred to
spend an evening with her books than to take a trip to Coney or any of
the other resorts where a girl's kisses pass as current coin in payment
for three or four hours' outing.

"Dick was just the kind of chap that would have appealed to Mary, or to
'most any other girl, for that matter. Maybe you remember him. He used
to be at the White House during Taft's regime, but they shifted most of
the force soon after Wilson came in and Dick was sent out to the Coast
on an opium hunt that kept him busy for more than a year. In fact, he
came east just in time to be assigned to the von Ewald case--and,
incidentally, to fall foul of Mary and Cupid, a pair that you couldn't
tie, much less beat."

       *       *       *       *       *

The von Ewald case [Quinn continued, after pausing a moment to repack
his pipe] was one of the many exploits of the Secret Service that never
got in the papers. To be strictly truthful, it wasn't as much a triumph
for the S. S. as it was for Mary McNilless--and, besides, we weren't at
war with Germany at that time, so it had to be kept rather dark.

But Germany was at war with us. You remember the Black Tom explosion in
August, nineteen sixteen? Well, if the plans of von Ewald and his
associates hadn't been frustrated by a little red-headed girl with
exceptional powers of observation, there would have been a detonation in
Wilmington, Delaware, that would have made the Black Tom affair, with
its damage of thirty millions of dollars, sound like the college yell of
a deaf-and-dumb institute.

As far back as January, nineteen sixteen, the Secret Service knew that
there were a number of Germans in New York who desired nothing so much
as to hinder the munitions industry of the United States, despite the
fact that we were a neutral nation.

From Harry Newton, the leader in the second plot to destroy the Welland
Canal, and from Paul Seib, who was implicated in the attempt to destroy
shipping at Hoboken, they forced the information that the conspirators
received their orders and drew their pay from a man of many aliases,
known to his associates as "Number eight fifty-nine" and occasionally,
to the world at large, as "von Ewald."

This much was known in Washington--but, when you came to analyze the
information, it didn't amount to a whole lot. It's one thing to know
that some one is plotting murder and arson on a wholesale scale, but
discovering the identity of that individual is an entirely different
proposition, one which called for all the finesse and obstinacy for
which the governmental detective services are famous.

Another factor that complicated the situation was that speed was
essential. The problem was entirely different from a counterfeiting or
smuggling case, where you can be content to let the people on the other
side of the table make as many moves as they wish, with the practical
certainty that you'll land them sooner or later. "Give them plenty of
rope and they'll land in Leavenworth" is a favorite axiom in the
Service--but here you had to conserve your rope to the uttermost. Every
day that passed meant that some new plot was that much nearer
completion--that millions of dollars in property and the lives of
no-one-knew-how-many people were still in danger.

So the order went forward from the headquarters of the Service, "Get the
man known as von Ewald and get him quick!"

Secret Service men, Postal inspectors, and Department of Justice agents
were called in from all parts of the country and rushed to New York,
until the metropolis looked like the headquarters of a convention of
governmental detectives. Grogan, the chap that landed Perry, the
master-counterfeiter, was there, as were George MacMasters and Sid
Shields, who prevented the revolution in Cuba three or four years ago.
Jimmy Reynolds was borrowed from the Internal Revenue Bureau, and
Althouse, who spoke German like a native, was brought up from the
border where he had been working on a propaganda case just across the
line.

There must have been forty men turned loose on this assignment alone,
and, in the course of the search for von Ewald, there were a number of
other developments scarcely less important than the main issue. At least
two of these--the Trenton taxicab tangle and the affair of the girl at
the switchboard--are exploits worthy of separate mention.

But, in spite of the great array of detective talent, no one could get a
line on von Ewald.

In April, when Dick Walters returned from the Coast, the other men in
the Service were frankly skeptical as to whether there was a von Ewald
at all. They had come to look upon him as a myth, a bugaboo. They
couldn't deny that there must be some guiding spirit to the Teutonic
plots, but they rather favored the theory that several men, rather than
one, were to blame.

Walters' instructions were just like the rest--to go to New York and
stick on the job until the German conspirator was apprehended.

"Maybe it's one man, maybe there're half a dozen," the chief admitted,
"but we've got to nail 'em. The very fact that they haven't started
anything of consequence since the early part of the year would appear to
point to renewed activity very shortly. It's up to you and the other men
already in New York to prevent the success of any of these plots."

Walters listened patiently to all the dope that had been gathered and
then figured, as had every new man, that it was up to him to do a little
sleuthing of his own.

The headquarters of the German agents was supposed to be somewhere in
Greenwich Village, on one of those half-grown alleys that always
threatens to meet itself coming back. But more than a score of
government operatives had combed that part of the town without securing
a trace of anything tangible. On the average of once a night the phone
at headquarters would ring and some one at the other end would send in a
hurry call for help up in the Bronx or in Harlem or some other distant
part of the city where he thought he had turned up a clue. The men on
duty would leap into the machine that always waited at the curb and
fracture every speed law ever made--only to find, when they arrived,
that it was a false alarm.

Finally, after several weeks of that sort of thing, conditions commenced
to get on Dick's nerves.

"I'm going to tackle this thing on my own," he announced. "Luck is going
to play as much of a part in landing von Ewald as anything else--and
luck never hunted with more than one man. Good-by! See you fellows
later."

But it was a good many weeks--August, to be precise--before the men in
the Federal Building had the opportunity of talking to Walters. He would
report over the phone, of course, and drop down there every few
days--but he'd only stay long enough to find out if there was any real
news or any orders from Washington. Then he'd disappear uptown.

"Dick's sure got a grouch these days," was the comment that went around
after Walters had paid one of his flying visits.

"Yeh," grunted Barry, who was on duty that night, "either the von Ewald
case's got on his nerves or he's found a girl that can't see him."

Neither supposition missed the mark very far.

Walters was getting sick and tired of the apparently fruitless chase
after an elusive German. He had never been known to flinch in the face
of danger--often went out of his way to find it, in fact--but this
constant search for a man whom nobody knew, a man of whom there wasn't
the slightest description, was nerve-racking, to say the least.

Then, too, he had met Mary McNilless.

He'd wandered into the Public Library one evening just before closing
time, and, like many another man, had fallen victim to Mary's red hair
and Mary's Irish eyes. But a brick wall was a soft proposition compared
to Mary McNilless. Snubbing good-looking young men who thought that the
tailors were missing an excellent model was part of the day's work with
the little library girl--though she secretly admitted to herself that
this one was a bit above the average.

Dick didn't get a rise that night, though, or for some days after. Every
evening at seven found him at the desk over which Miss McNilless
presided, framing some almost intelligent question about books in order
to prolong the conversation. Mary would answer politely and--that was
all.

But, almost imperceptibly, a bond of friendship sprang up between them.
Maybe it was the fact that Dick's mother had been Irish, too, or
possibly it was because he admitted to himself that this girl was
different from the rest, and, admitting it, laid the foundation for a
deep-souled respect that couldn't help but show in his manner.

Within the month Dick was taking her home, and in six weeks they were
good pals, bumming around to queer, out-of-the-way restaurants and
planning outings which Dick, in his heart, knew could never
materialize--not until von Ewald had been run to cover, at any rate.

Several times Mary tried to find out her companion's
profession--diplomatically, of course, but nevertheless she was curious.
Naturally, Dick couldn't tell her. Said he had "just finished a job on
the Coast and was taking a vacation in New York." But Mary had sense
enough to know that he wasn't at leisure. Also that he was working on
something that kept his mind constantly active--for several times he had
excused himself in a hurry and then returned, anywhere from half an hour
to an hour later, with a rather crestfallen expression.

After they had reached the "Dick and Mary" stage she came right out one
night and asked him.

"Hon," he told her, "that's one thing that I've got to keep from you for
a while. It's nothing that you would be ashamed of, though, but
something that will make you mighty proud. At least," he added, "It'll
make you proud if I don't fall down on the job almighty hard. Meanwhile,
all I can do is to ask you to trust me. Will you?"

The tips of her fingers rested on the back of his hand for just a moment
before she said, "You know I will, Dick"--and neither of them mentioned
the subject from that time on.

On the night of the Black Tom explosion, early in August, Dick didn't
show up at the Library at the usual hour, and, while this didn't worry
Mary, because it had happened several times before, she began to be
annoyed when three nights passed the same way. Of course, she had no way
of knowing that the Service had received a tip from a stool pigeon on
the pay roll of the New York police force that "a bunch of Germans were
planning a big explosion of some kind" just a few hours before the earth
rocked with the force of the blow-up in Jersey. Every government
operative in the city had been informed of the rumor, but few of them
had taken it seriously and not one had any reason to expect that the
plot would culminate so close to New York. But the echo of the first
blast had hardly died away before there were a dozen agents on the spot,
weaving a network around the entire district. All they got for their
pains, however, was a few suspects who very evidently didn't know a
thing.

So it was a very tired and disgusted Dick who entered the Library four
nights later and almost shambled up to Mary's desk.

"I'll be off duty in half an hour," she told him. "From the way you
look, you need a little comforting."

"I do that," he admitted. "Don't make me wait any longer than you have
to," and he amused himself by glancing over the late seekers after
knowledge.

When they had finally seated themselves in a cozy corner of a little
restaurant in the upper Forties, Dick threw caution to the winds and
told Mary all about his troubles.

"I haven't the least business to do it," he confessed, "and if the chief
found it out I'd be bounced so fast that it would make my head swim.
But, in the first place, I want you to marry me, and I know you wouldn't
think of doing that unless you knew something more about me."

There was just the flicker of a smile around Mary's mouth as she said,
almost perfunctorily, "No, of course not!" But her intuition told her
that this wasn't the time to joke, and, before Walters could go on, she
added, "I know you well enough, Dick, not to worry about that end of
it."

So Walters told her everything from the beginning--and it didn't take
more than five minutes at that. Outside of the fact that his people
lived in Des Moines, that he had been in the Secret Service for eight
years, and that he hadn't been able to do a thing toward the
apprehension of a certain German spy that the government was extremely
anxious to locate, there was pitifully little to tell.

"The whole thing," he concluded, "came to a head the other night--the
night I didn't show up. We knew that something was going to break,
somewhere, but we couldn't discover where until it was too late to
prevent the explosion across the river. Now that they've gotten away
with that, they'll probably lay their lines for something even bigger."

"Well, now that I've told you, what d'you think?"

"You mean you'd like to marry me?" Mary asked with a smile.

"I don't know how to put it any plainer," Dick admitted--and what
followed caused the waiter to wheel around and suddenly commence dusting
off a table that already was bright enough to see your face in.

"There wasn't the slightest clue left after the Black Tom affair?" Mary
asked, as she straightened her hat.

"Not one. We did find two of the bombs that hadn't exploded--devilishly
clever arrangements, with a new combination of chemicals. Something was
evidently wrong with the mixture, though, for they wouldn't go off, even
when our experts started to play with them. The man who made them
evidently wasn't quite sure of his ground. But there wasn't a thing
about the bombs themselves that would provide any indication of where
they came from."

"The man who made them must have had a pretty thorough knowledge of
chemistry," Mary mused.

"Mighty near perfect," admitted Walters. "At least six exploded on time,
and, from what I understand, they were loaded to the muzzle with a
mixture that no one but an expert would dare handle."

"And," continued Mary, with just a hint of excitement in her voice, "the
bomb-maker would continue to investigate the subject. He would want to
get the latest information, the most recent books, the--"

"What are you driving at?" Walters interrupted.

"Just this," and Mary leaned across the table so that there was no
possibility of being overheard. "We girls have a good deal of time on
our hands, so we get into the habit of making conjectures and forming
theories about the 'regulars'--the people who come into the Library
often enough for us to know them by sight.

"Up to a month ago there was a man who dropped into the reference room
nearly every day to consult books from Shelf Forty-five. Naturally he
came up to my desk, and, as he usually arrived during the slack periods,
I had plenty of time to study him. Maybe it was because I had been
reading Lombroso, or possibly it's because I am just naturally
observant, but I noticed that, in addition to each of his ears being
practically lobeless, one of them was quite pointed at the top--almost
like a fox's.

"For a week he didn't show up, and then one day another man came in and
asked for a book from Shelf Forty-five. Just as he turned away I had a
shock. Apparently he wasn't in the least like the other man in anything
save height--but neither of his ears had any lobes to speak of and the
top of them was pointed! When he returned the book I looked him over
pretty thoroughly and came to the conclusion that, in spite of the fact
that his general appearance differed entirely from the other man's, they
were really one and the same!"

"But what," grumbled Walters, "has that to do with the Black Tom
explosion?"

"The last time this man came to the Library," said Mary, "was two days
before the night you failed to arrive--two days before the explosion.
And--Do you know what books are kept on Shelf Forty-five?"

"No. What?"

"The latest works on the chemistry of explosives!"

Walters sat up with a jerk that threatened to overthrow the table.

"Mary," he said, in a whisper, "I've a hunch that you've succeeded where
all the rest of us fell down! The disguises and the constant reference
to books on explosives are certainly worth looking into. What name did
this man give?"

"Names," she corrected. "I don't recall what they were or the addresses,
either. But it would be easy to find them on the cards. We don't have
very many calls for books from Shelf Forty-five."

"It doesn't matter, though," and Walters slipped back into his
disconsolate mood. "He wouldn't leave a lead as open as that, of
course."

"No, certainly not," agreed Mary. "But the last time he was there he
asked for Professor Stevens's new book. It hadn't come in then, but I
told him we expected it shortly. So, unless you men have scared him off,
he'll be back in a day or two--possibly in a new disguise. Why don't you
see the librarian, get a place as attendant in the reference room, and
I'll tip you off the instant I spot that pointed ear. That's one thing
he can't hide!"

The next morning there was a new employee in the reference room. No one
knew where he came from and no one--save the librarian and Mary
McNilless--knew what he was there for, because his principal occupation
appeared to be lounging around inconspicuously in the neighborhood of
the information desk. There he stayed for three days, wondering whether
this clue, like all the rest, would dissolve into thin air.

About five o'clock on the afternoon of the third day a man strolled up
to Mary's desk and asked if Professor Stevens's book had come in yet. It
was reposing at that moment on Shelf Forty-five, as Mary well knew, but
she said she'd see, and left the room, carefully arranging her hair at
the back of her neck with her left hand--a signal which she and Dick had
agreed upon the preceding evening.

Before she returned the new attendant had vanished, but Dick Walters, in
his usual garb, was loitering around the only entrance to the reference
room, watching the suspect out of the corner of his eye.

"I'm sorry," Mary reported, "but the Stevens book won't be in until
to-morrow," and she was barely able to keep the anxiety out of her voice
as she spoke.

Had Dick gotten her signal? Would he be able to trail his man? Could he
capture him without being injured? These and a score of other questions
rushed through her mind as she saw the German leave the room. Once
outside--well, she'd have to wait for Dick to tell her what happened
then.

The man who was interested in the chemistry of explosives apparently
wasn't in the least afraid of being followed, for he took a bus uptown,
alighted at Eighty-third Street, and vanished into one of the
innumerable small apartment houses in that section of the city. Walters
kept close behind him, and he entered the lobby of the apartment house
in time to hear his quarry ascending to the fourth floor. Then he
signaled to the four men who had followed him up the Avenue in a
government-owned machine--men who had been stationed outside the Library
in the event of just such an occurrence--and instructed two of them to
guard the rear of the house, while the other two remained in front.

"I'm going to make this haul myself," Walters stated, "but I want you
boys to cover up in case anything happens to me. No matter what occurs,
don't let him get away. Shoot first and ask questions afterward!" and he
had re-entered the house almost before he finished speaking.

On the landing at the third floor he paused long enough to give the men
at the rear a chance to get located. Then--a quick ring at the bell on
the fourth floor and he waited for action.

Nothing happened. Another ring--and still no response.

As he pressed the button for the third time the door swung slowly
inward, affording only a glimpse of a dark, uninviting hall. But, once
he was inside, the door closed silently and he heard a bolt slipped into
place. Simultaneously a spot light, arranged over the doorway, flashed
on and Dick was almost dazzled by the glare. Out of the darkness came
the guttural inquiry:

"What do you want?"

"Not a thing in the world," replied Walters, "except to know if a man
named Simpson lives here."

"No," came the voice, "he does not. Get out!"

"Sure I will if you'll pull back that bolt. What's the idea, anyhow?
You're as mysterious as if you were running a bomb factory or
something--"

As he spoke he ducked, for if the words had the effect he hoped, the
other would realize that he was cornered and attempt to escape.

A guttural German oath, followed by a rapid movement of the man's hand
toward his hip pocket was the reply. In a flash Dick slipped forward,
bending low to avoid the expected attack, and seized the German in a
half nelson that defied movement. Backing out of the circle of light, he
held the helpless man in front of him--as a shelter in case of an
attack from other occupants of the apartment--and called for assistance.
The crash of glass at the rear told him that reinforcements had made
their way up the fire escape and had broken in through the window. A
moment later came the sound of feet on the stairs and the other two
operatives were at the door, revolvers drawn and ready for action.

But there wasn't any further struggle. Von Ewald--or whatever his real
name was, for that was never decided--was alone and evidently realized
that the odds were overwhelming. Meekly, almost placidly, he allowed the
handcuffs to be slipped over his wrists and stood by as the Secret
Service men searched the apartment. Not a line or record was found to
implicate anyone else--but what they did discover was a box filled with
bombs precisely like those picked up on the scene of the Black Tom
explosion, proof sufficient to send the German to the penitentiary for
ten years--for our laws, unfortunately, do not permit of the death
penalty for spies unless caught red-handed by the military authorities.

That he was the man for whom they were searching--the mysterious "No.
859"--was apparent from the fact that papers concealed in his desk
contained full details as to the arrangement of the Nemours plant at
Wilmington, Delaware, with a dozen red dots indicative of the best
places to plant bombs. Of his associates and the manner in which he
managed his organization there wasn't the slightest trace. But the Black
Tom explosion, if you recall, was the last big catastrophe of its kind
in America--and the capture of von Ewald was the reason that more of the
German plots didn't succeed.

The Treasury Department realized this fact when Mary McNilless, on the
morning of the day she was to be married to Dick Walters, U. S. S. S.,
received a very handsome chest of silver, including a platter engraved,
"To Miss Mary McNilless, whose cleverness and keen perception saved
property valued at millions of dollars."

No one ever found out who sent it, but it's a safe bet that the order
came from Washington by way of Wilmington, where the Nemours plant still
stands--thanks to the quickness of Mary's Irish eyes.




V

PHYLLIS DODGE, SMUGGLER EXTRAORDINARY


Bill Quinn tossed aside his evening paper and, cocking his feet upon a
convenient chair, remarked that, now that peace was finally signed,
sealed, and delivered, there ought to be a big boom in the favorite
pastime of the idle rich.

"Meaning what?" I inquired.

"Smuggling, of course," said Quinn, who only retired from Secret Service
when an injury received in action forced him to do so.

"Did you ever travel on a liner when four out of every five people on
board didn't admit that they were trying to beat the customs officials
one way or another--and the only reason the other one didn't follow suit
was because he knew enough to keep his mouth shut. That's how Uncle
Sam's detectives pick up a lot of clues. The amateur crook never
realizes that silence is golden and that oftentimes speech leads to a
heavy fine.

"Now that the freedom of the seas is an accomplished fact the whole crew
of would-be smugglers will doubtless get to work again, only to be
nabbed in port. Inasmuch as ocean travel has gone up with the rest of
the cost of living, it'll probably be a sport confined to the
comparatively rich, for a couple of years anyhow.

"It was different in the old days. Every steamer that came in was loaded
to the eyes and you never knew when you were going to spot a hidden
necklace or a packet of diamonds that wasn't destined to pay duty. There
were thrills to the game, too, believe me.

"Why, just take the case of Phyllis Dodge...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Dodge [Quinn continued, after he had packed his pipe to a condition
where it was reasonably sure to remain lighted for some time] was,
theoretically at least, a widow. Her full name, as it appeared on many
passenger lists during the early part of 1913, was Mrs. Mortimer C.
Dodge, of Cleveland, Ohio. When the customs officials came to look into
the matter they weren't able to find anyone in Cleveland who knew her,
but then it's no penal offense to give the purser a wrong address, or
even a wrong name, for that matter.

While there may have been doubts about Mrs. Dodge's widowhood--or
whether she had ever been married, for that matter--there could be none
about her beauty. In the language of the classics, she was there. Black
hair, brown eyes, a peaches-and-cream complexion that came and went
while you watched it, and a figure that would have made her fortune in
the Follies. Joe Gregory said afterward that trailing her was one of the
easiest things he had ever done.

To get the whole story of Phyllis and her extraordinary
cleverness--extraordinary because it was so perfectly obvious--we'll
have to cut back a few months before she came on the scene.

For some time the Treasury Department had been well aware that a number
of precious stones, principally pearl necklaces, were being smuggled
into the country. Agents abroad--the department maintains a regular
force in Paris, London, Rotterdam, and other European points, you
know--had reported the sale of the jewels and they had turned up a few
weeks later in New York or Chicago. But the Customs Service never
considers it wise to trace stones back from their owners on this side.
There are too many ramifications to any well-planned smuggling scheme,
and it is too easy for some one to claim that he had found them in a
long-forgotten chest in the attic or some such story as that. The burden
of proof rests upon the government in a case of this kind and, except in
the last extremity, it always tries to follow the chase from the other
end--to nab the smuggler in the act and thus build up a jury-proof case.

Reports of the smuggling cases had been filtered into the department
half a dozen times in as many months, and the matter finally got on the
chief's nerves to such a degree that he determined to thrash it out if
it took every man he had.

In practically every case the procedure was the same--though the only
principals known were different each time.

Rotterdam, for example, would report: "Pearl necklace valued at $40,000,
sold to-day to man named Silverburg. Have reason to believe it is
destined for States"--and then would follow a technical description of
the necklace. Anywhere from six weeks to three months later the necklace
would turn up in the possession of a jeweler who bore a shady
reputation. Sometimes the article wouldn't appear at all, which might
have been due to the fact that they weren't brought into this country or
that the receivers had altered them beyond recognition. However, the
European advices pointed to the latter supposition--which didn't soothe
the chief's nerves the least bit.

Finally, along in the middle of the spring of nineteen thirteen, there
came a cable from Paris announcing the sale of the famous Yquem
emerald--a gorgeous stone that you couldn't help recognizing once you
got the description. The purchaser was reported to be an American named
Williamson. He paid cash for it, so his references and his antecedents
were not investigated at the time.

Sure enough, it wasn't two months later when a report came in from
Chicago that a pork-made millionaire had added to his collection a stone
which tallied to the description of the Yquem emerald.

"Shall we go after it from this end, Chief?" inquired one of the men on
the job in Washington. "We can make the man who bought it tell us where
he got it and then sweat the rest of the game out of the go-betweens."

"Yes," snorted the chief, "and be laughed out of court on some
trumped-up story framed by a well-paid lawyer. Not a chance! I'm going
to land those birds and land 'em with the goods. We can't afford to take
any chances with this crowd. They've evidently got money and brains, a
combination that you've got to stay awake nights to beat. No--we'll nail
'em in New York just as they're bringing the stones in.

"Send a wire to Gregory to get on the job at once and tell New York to
turn loose every man they've got--though they've been working on the
case long enough, Heaven knows!"

The next morning when Gregory and his society manner strolled into the
customhouse in New York he found the place buzzing. Evidently the
instructions from Washington had been such as to make the entire force
fear for their jobs unless the smuggling combination was broken up
quickly. It didn't take Joe very long to get the details. They weren't
many and he immediately discarded the idea of possible collusion between
the buyers of the stones abroad. It looked to be a certainty on the face
of it, but, once you had discovered that, what good did it do you? It
wasn't possible to jail a man just because he bought some jewels in
Europe--and, besides, the orders from Washington were very clear that
the case was to be handled strictly from this side--at least, the final
arrest was to be made on American soil, to avoid extradition
complications and the like.

So when Joe got all the facts they simply were that some valuable jewels
had been purchased in Europe and had turned up in America, without going
through the formality of visiting the customhouse, anywhere from six
weeks to three months later.

"Not much to work on," grumbled Gregory, "and I suppose, as usual, that
the chief will be as peevish as Hades if we don't nab the guilty party
within the week."

"It's more than possible," admitted one of the men who had handled the
case.

Gregory studied the dates on which the jewels had been purchased and
those on which they had been located in this country for a few moments
in silence. Then:

"Get me copies of the passenger lists of every steamer that has docked
here in the past year," he directed. "Of course it's possible that these
things might have been landed at Boston or Philadelphia, but New York's
the most likely port."

When the lists had been secured Gregory stuffed them into his suit case
and started for the door.

"Where you going?" inquired McMahon, the man in charge of the New York
office.

"Up to the Adirondacks for a few days," Gregory replied.

"What's the idea? Think the stuff is being brought over by airplane and
landed inland? Liners don't dock upstate, you know."

"No," said Gregory, "but that's where I'm going to dock until I can
digest this stuff," and he tapped his suit case. "Somewhere in this
bunch of booklets there's a clue to this case and it's up to me to spot
it. Good-by."

Five days later when he sauntered back into the New York office the suit
case was surprisingly light. Apparently every one of the passenger lists
had vanished. As a matter of fact, they had been boiled down to three
names which were carefully inscribed in Joe's notebook.

"Did you pick up any jewels in the Catskills?" was the question that
greeted him when he entered.

"Wasn't in the Catskills," he growled. "Went up to a camp in the
Adirondacks--colder'n blazes. Any more stuff turn up?"

"No, but a wire came from Washington just after you left to watch out
for a hundred-thousand-dollar string of pearls sold at a private auction
in London last week to an American named--"

"I don't care what _his_ name was," Gregory cut in. "What was the date
they were sold?"

"The sixteenth."

Gregory glanced at the calendar.

"And to-day is the twenty-second," he mused. "What boats are due in the
next three days?"

"The _Cretic_ docks this afternoon and the _Tasmania_ ought to get in
to-morrow. That'll be all until the end of the week."

"Right!" snapped Gregory. "Don't let a soul off the _Cretic_ until I've
had a look at her passenger list. It's too late to go down the harbor
now, but not a person's to get off that ship until I've had a chance to
look 'em over. Also cable for a copy of the _Tasmania's_ passenger list.
Hurry it up!"

Less than ten minutes after he had slipped on board the _Cretic_,
however, Gregory gave the signal which permitted the gangplank to be
lowered and the passengers to proceed as usual--except for the fact that
the luggage of everyone and the persons of not a few were searched with
more than the average carefulness. But not a trace of the pearls was
found, as Joe had anticipated. A careful inspection of the passenger
list and a few moments with the purser had convinced him that none of
his three suspects were on board.

Shortly after he returned to the office, the list of the _Tasmania's_
passengers began to come over the cables. Less than half a page had been
received when Gregory uttered a sudden exclamation, reached for his
notebook, compared a name in it with one which appeared on the cabled
report, and indulged in the luxury of a deep-throated chuckle.

"Greg's got a nibble somewhere," commented one of the bystanders.

"Yes," admitted his companion, "but landin' the fish is a different
matter. Whoever's on the other end of that line is a mighty cagy
individual."

But, though he undoubtedly overheard the remark, Gregory didn't seem to
be the least bit worried. In fact, his hat was at a more rakish angle
than usual and his cane fairly whistled through the air as he wandered
up the Avenue half an hour later.

The next the customs force heard of him was when he boarded the
quarantine boat the next morning, clambering on the liner a little later
with all the skill of a pilot.

"You have a passenger on board by the name of Dodge," he informed the
purser, after he had shown his badge. "Mrs. Mortimer C. Dodge. What do
you know about her?"

"Not a thing in the world," said the purser, "except that she is a most
beautiful and apparently attractive woman. Crossed with us once
before--"

"Twice," corrected Gregory. "Came over in January and went right back."

"That's right," said the purser, "so she did. I'd forgotten that. But,
beyond that fact, there isn't anything that I can add."

"Seem to be familiar with anyone on board?"

"Not particularly. Mixes with the younger married set and I've noticed
her on deck with the Mortons quite frequently. Probably met them on her
return trip last winter. They were along then, if I remember rightly."

"Thanks," said the customs operative. "You needn't mention anything
about my inquiries, of course," and he mixed with the throng of
newspaper reporters who were picking up news in various sections of the
big vessel.

When the _Tasmania_ docked, Gregory was the first one off.

"Search Mrs. Mortimer C. Dodge to the skin," he directed the matron.
"Take down her hair, tap the heels of her shoes, and go through all the
usual stunts, but be as gentle as you can about it. Say that we've
received word that some uncut diamonds--not pearls, mind you--are
concealed on the _Tasmania_ and that orders have been given to go over
everybody thoroughly. Pass the word along the line to give out the same
information, so she won't be suspicious. I don't think you'll find
anything, but you never can tell."

At that, Joe was right. The matron didn't locate a blessed thing out of
the way. Mrs. Dodge had brought in a few dutiable trinkets, but they
were all down on her declaration, and within the hour she was headed
uptown in a taxi, accompanied by a maid who had met her as she stepped
out of the customs office.

Not far behind them trailed another taxi, top up and Gregory's eyes
glued to the window behind the chauffeur.

The first machine finally drew up at the Astor, and Mrs. Dodge and the
maid went in, followed by a pile of luggage which had been searched
until it was a moral certainty that not a needle would have been
concealed in it.

Gregory waited until they were out of sight and then followed.

In answer to his inquiries at the desk he learned that Mrs. Dodge had
stopped at the hotel several times before and the house detective
assured him that there was nothing suspicious about her conduct.

"How about the maid?" inquired Gregory.

"Don't know a thing about her, either, except that she is the same one
she had before. Pretty little thing, too--though not as good-looking as
her mistress."

For the next three days Joe hung around the hotel or followed the lady
from the _Tasmania_ wherever she went. Something in the back of his
head--call it intuition or a hunch or whatever you please, but it's the
feeling that a good operative gets when he's on the right trail--told
him that he was "warm," as the kids say. Appearances seemed to deny that
fact. Mrs. Dodge went only to the most natural places--a few visits to
the stores, a couple to fashionable modistes and milliners, and some
drives through the Park, always accompanied by her maid and always in
the most sedate and open manner.

But on the evening of the third day the house detective tipped Joe off
that his prey was leaving in the morning.

"Guess she's going back to Europe," reported the house man. "Gave orders
to have a taxi ready at nine and her trunks taken down to the docks
before them. Better get busy if you want to land her."

"I'm not ready for that just yet," Gregory admitted with a scowl.

When Mrs. Dodge's taxi drove off the following morning Joe wasn't far
away, and, acting on orders which he had delivered over the phone, no
less than half a dozen operatives watched the lady and the maid very
closely when they reached the dock.

Not a thing came of it, however. Both of them went to the stateroom
which had been reserved and the maid remained to help with the unpacking
until the "All-ashore-that-'re-going-ashore" was bellowed through the
boat. Then she left and stood on the pier until the ship had cleared the
dock.

"It beats me," muttered Gregory. "But I'm willing to gamble my job that
I'm right." And that night he wired to Washington to keep a close
lookout for the London pearls, adding that he felt certain they would
turn up before long.

"In that case," muttered the chief at the other end of the wire, "why in
Heaven's name didn't he get them when they came in?"

Sure enough, not a fortnight had passed before St. Louis reported that a
string of pearls, perfectly matched, answering to the description of the
missing jewels, had been offered for sale there through private
channels.

The first reaction was a telegram to Gregory that fairly burned the
wires, short but to the point. "Either the man who smuggled that
necklace or your job in ten days," it read.

And Gregory replied, "Give me three weeks and you'll have one or the
other."

Meanwhile he had been far from inactive. Still playing his hunch that
Phyllis Dodge had something to do with the smuggling game, he had put in
time cultivating the only person on this side that appeared to know
her--the maid.

It was far from a thankless task, for Alyce--she spelled it with a
"y"--was pretty and knew it. Furthermore, she appeared to be entirely
out of her element in a cheap room on Twenty-fourth Street. Most of the
time she spent in wandering up the Avenue, and it was there that Gregory
made her acquaintance--through the expedient of bumping her bag out of
her hands and restoring it with one of his courtly bows. The next minute
he was strolling alongside, remarking on the beauty of the weather.

But, although he soon got to know Alyce well enough to take her to the
theater and to the cabarets, it didn't seem to get him anywhere. She was
perfectly frank about her position. Said she was a hair dresser by trade
and that she acted as lady's maid to a Mrs. Dodge, who spent the better
part of her time abroad.

"In fact," she said, "Mrs. Dodge is only here three or four days every
two months or so."

"And she pays you for your time in between?"

"Oh yes," Alyce replied; "she's more than generous."

"I should say she was," Gregory thought to himself--but he considered it
best to change the subject.

During the days that followed, Joe exerted every ounce of his
personality in order to make the best possible impression. Posing as a
man who had made money in the West, he took Alyce everywhere and treated
her royally. Finally, when he considered the time ripe, he injected a
little love into the equation and hinted that he thought it was about
time to settle down and that he appeared to have found the proper person
to settle with.

But there, for the first time, Alyce balked. She didn't refuse him, but
she stated in so many words that she had a place that suited her for the
time being, and that, until the fall, at least, she preferred to keep on
with it.

"That suits me all right," declared Gregory. "Take your time about it.
Meanwhile we'll continue to be good friends and trail around together,
eh?"

"Certainly," said Alyce, "er--that is--until Tuesday."

"Tuesday?" inquired Joe. "What's coming off Tuesday?"

"Mrs. Dodge will arrive on the _Atlantic_," was the reply, "and I'll
have to be with her for three days at least."

"Three days--" commenced Gregory, and halted himself. It wasn't wise to
show too much interest. But that night he called the chief on long
distance and inquired if there had been any recent reports of suspicious
jewel sales abroad. "Yes," came the voice from Washington, "pearls
again. Loose ones, this time. And your three weeks' grace is up at noon
Saturday." The click that followed as the receiver hung up was finality
itself.

The same procedure, altered in a few minor details, was followed when
Mrs. Dodge landed. Again she was searched to the skin; again her luggage
was gone over with microscopic care, and again nothing was found.

This time she stayed at the Knickerbocker, but Alyce was with her as
usual.

Deprived of his usual company and left to his own devices, Gregory took
a long walk up the Drive and tried to thrash out the problem.

"Comes over on a different boat almost every trip," he thought, "so that
eliminates collusion with any of the crew. Doesn't stay at the same
hotel two times running, so there's nothing there. Has the same maid and
always returns--"

Then it was that motorists on Riverside Drive were treated to the sight
of a young and extremely prepossessing man, dressed in the height of
fashion, throwing his hat in the air and uttering a yell that could be
heard for blocks. After which he disappeared hurriedly in the direction
of the nearest drug store.

A hasty search through the phone book gave him the number he wanted--the
offices of the Black Star line.

"Is Mr. MacPherson, the purser of the _Atlantic_, there?" he inquired.
Then: "Hello! Mr. MacPherson? This is Gregory, Customs Division. You
remember me, don't you? Worked on the Maitland diamond case with you two
years ago.... Wonder if you could tell me something I want to know--is
Mrs. Mortimer C. Dodge booked to go back with you to-morrow?... She is?
What's the number of her stateroom? And--er--what was the number of the
room she had coming over?... I thank you."

If the motorists whom Gregory had startled on the Drive had seen him
emerge from the phone booth they would have marveled at the look of keen
satisfaction and relief that was spread over his face. The cat that
swallowed the canary was tired of life, compared with Joe at that
moment.

Next morning the Customs operatives were rather surprised to see Gregory
stroll down to the _Atlantic_ dock about ten o'clock.

"Thought you were somewhere uptown on the chief's pet case," said one of
them.

"So I was," answered Joe. "But that's practically cleaned up."

With that he went aboard, and no one saw him until just before the
"All-ashore" call. Then he took up his place beside the gangplank, with
three other men placed near by in case of accident.

"Follow my lead," he directed. "I'll speak to the girl. Two of you stick
here to make certain that she doesn't get away, and you, Bill, beat it
on board then and tell the captain that the boat's not to clear until we
give the word. We won't delay him more than ten minutes at the outside."

When Alyce came down the gangplank a few minutes later, in the midst of
people who had been saying good-by to friends and relatives, she spotted
Joe waiting for her, and started to move hurriedly away. Gregory caught
up with her before she had gone a dozen feet.

"Good morning, Alyce," he said. "Thought I'd come down to meet you.
What've you got in the bag there?" indicating her maid's handbag.

"Not--not a thing," said the girl, flushing. Just then the matron joined
the party, as previously arranged, and Joe's tone took on its official
hardness.

"Hurry up and search her! We don't want to keep the boat any longer than
we have to."

Less than a minute later the matron thrust her head out of the door long
enough to report: "We found 'em--the pearls. She had 'em in the front of
her dress."

Gregory was up the gangplank in a single bound. A moment later he was
knocking at the door of Mrs. Dodge's stateroom. The instant the knob
turned he was inside, informing Phyllis that she was under arrest on a
charge of bringing jewels into the United States without the formality
of paying duty. Of course, the lady protested--but the _Atlantic_
sailed, less than ten minutes behind schedule time, without her.

Promptly at twelve the phone on the desk of the chief of the Customs
Division in Washington buzzed noisily.

"Gregory speaking," came through the receiver. "My time's up--and I've
got the party you want. Claims to be from Cleveland and sails under the
name of Mrs. Mortimer C. Dodge--first name Phyllis. She's confessed and
promises to turn state's evidence if we'll go light with her."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That," added Quinn, "was the finish of Mrs. Dodge, so far as the
government was concerned. In order to land the whole crew--the people
who were handling the stuff on this side as well as the ones who were
mixed up in the scheme abroad--they let her go scot-free, with the
proviso that she's to be rushed to Atlanta if she ever pokes her nose
into the United States again. The last I heard of her she was in Monaco,
tangled up in a blackmail case there.

"Gregory told me all about it sometime later. Said that the first hunch
had come to him when he studied the passengers' lists in the wilds of
the Adirondacks. Went there to be alone and concentrate. He found that
of all the people listed, only three--two men and a Mrs. Dodge--had made
the trip frequently in the past six months. The frequency of Mrs.
Dodge's travel evidently made it impracticable for her to use different
aliases. Some one would be sure to spot her.

"But it wasn't until that night on Riverside Drive that the significance
of the data struck him. Each time she took the same boat on which she
had come over! Did she have the same stateroom? The phone call to
MacPherson established the fact that she did--this time at least. The
rest was almost as obvious as the original plan. The jewels were brought
aboard, passed on to Phyllis, and she tucked them away somewhere in her
stateroom. Her bags and her person could, of course, be searched with
perfect safety. Then, what was more natural than that her maid should
accompany her on board when she was leaving? Nobody ever pays any
attention to people who board the boat at _this_ end, so Alyce was able
to walk off with the stuff under the very eyes of the customs
authorities--and they found later that she had the nerve to place it in
the hands of the government for the next twenty-four hours. She sent it
by registered mail to Pittsburgh and it was passed along through an
underground "fence" channel until a prospective purchaser appeared.

"Perfectly obvious and perfectly simple--that's why the plan succeeded
until Gregory began to make love to Alyce and got the idea that Mrs.
Dodge was going right back to Europe hammered into his head. It had
occurred to him before, but he hadn't placed much value on it....

"O-o-o-o!" yawned Quinn. "I'm getting dry. Trot out some grape juice and
put on that Kreisler record--'Drigo's Serenade.' I love to hear it.
Makes me think of the time when they landed that scoundrel Weimar."




VI

A MATTER OF RECORD


"What was that you mentioned last week--something about the record of
Kreisler's 'Drigo's Serenade' reminding you of the capture of some one?"
I asked Bill Quinn one summer evening as he painfully hoisted his game
leg upon the porch railing.

"Sure it does," replied Quinn. "Never fails. Put it on again so I can
get the necessary atmosphere, as you writers call it, and possibly I'll
spill the yarn--provided you guarantee to keep the ginger ale flowing
freely. That and olive oil are about the only throat lubricants left
us."

So I slipped on the record, rustled a couple of bottles from the ice
box, and settled back comfortably, for when Quinn once started on one of
his reminiscences of government detective work he didn't like to be
interrupted.

"That's the piece, all right," Bill remarked, as the strains of the
violin drifted off into the night. "Funny how a few notes of music like
that could nail a criminal while at the same time it was saving the
lives of nobody knows how many other people--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember Paul Weimar [continued Quinn, picking up the thread of his
story]. He was the most dangerous of the entire gang that helped von
Bernstorff, von Papen, and the rest of that crew plot against the United
States at a time when we were supposed to be entirely neutral.

An Austrian by birth, Weimar was as thoroughly a Hun at heart as anyone
who ever served the Hohenzollerns and, in spite of his size, he was as
slippery as they make 'em. Back in the past somewhere he had been a
detective in the service of the Atlas Line, but for some years before
the war was superintendent of the police attached to the
Hamburg-American boats. That, of course, gave him the inside track in
every bit of deviltry he wanted to be mixed up in, for he had made it
his business to cultivate the acquaintance of wharf rats, dive keepers,
and all the rest of the scum of the Seven Seas that haunts the docks.

Standing well over six feet, Weimar had a pair of fists that came in
mighty handy in a scuffle, and a tongue that could curl itself around
all the blasphemies of a dozen languages. There wasn't a water front
where they didn't hate him--neither was there a water front where they
didn't fear him.

Of course, when the war broke in August, 1914, the Hamburg-American line
didn't have any further official use for Weimar. Their ships were tied
up in neutral or home ports and Herr Paul was out of a job--for at least
ten minutes. But he was entirely too valuable a man for the German
organization to overlook for longer than that, and von Papen, in
Washington, immediately added him to his organization--with blanket
instructions to go the limit on any dirty work he cared to undertake.
Later, he worked for von Bernstorff; Doctor Dumba, the Austrian
ambassador; and Doctor von Nuber, the Austrian consul in New York--but
von Papen had first claim upon his services and did not hesitate to
press them, as proven by certain entries in the checkbook of the
military attaché during the spring and summer of 1915.

Of course, it didn't take the Secret Service and the men from the
Department of Justice very long to get on to the fact that Weimar was
altogether too close to the German embassy for the safety and comfort of
the United States government. But what were they to do about it? We
weren't at war then and you couldn't arrest a man merely because he
happened to know von Papen and the rest of his precious companions. You
had to have something on him--something that would stand up in
court--and Paul Weimar was too almighty clever to let that happen.

When you remember that it took precisely one year to land this
Austrian--one year of constant watching and unceasing espionage--you
will see how well he conducted himself.

And the government's sleuths weren't the only ones who were after him,
either.

Captain Kenney, of the New York Police Force, lent mighty efficient aid
and actually invented a new system of trailing in order to find out just
what he was up to.

In the old days, you told a man to go out and follow a suspect and that
was all there was to it. The "shadow" would trail along half a block or
so in the rear, keeping his man always in view, and bring home a full
account of what he had done all day. But you couldn't do that with
Weimar--he was too foxy. From what some of the boys have told me, I
think he took a positive delight in throwing them off the scent, whether
he had anything up his sleeve or not.

One day, for example, you could have seen his big bulk swinging
nonchalantly up Broadway, as if he didn't have a care in the world. A
hundred feet or more behind him was Bob Dugan, one of Kenney's men. When
Weimar disappeared into the Subway station at Times Square, Dugan was
right behind him, and when the Austrian boarded the local for Grand
Central Station, Dugan was on the same train--on the same car, in fact.
But when they reached the station, things began to happen. Weimar left
the local and commenced to stroll up and down the platform, waiting
until a local train and an express arrived at the same time. That was
his opportunity. He made a step or two forward, as if to board the
express, and Dugan--not wishing to make himself too conspicuous--slipped
on board just as the doors were closing, only to see Weimar push back
and jam his way on the local!

Variations of that stunt occurred time after time. Even the detailing of
two men to follow him failed in its purpose, for the Austrian would
enter a big office building, leap into an express elevator just as it
was about to ascend, slip the operator a dollar to stop at one of the
lower floors, and be lost for the day or until some one picked him up by
accident.

So Cap Kenney called in four of his best men and told them that it was
essential that Weimar be watched.

"Two of you," he directed, "stick with him all the time. Suppose you
locate him the first thing in the morning at his house on Twenty-fourth
Street, for example. You, Cottrell, station yourself two blocks up the
street. Gary, you go the same distance down. Then, no matter which way
he starts he'll have one of you in front of him and one behind. The man
in front will have to use his wits to guess which way he intends to go
and to beat him to it. If he boards a car, the man in front can pick him
up with the certainty that the other will cover the trail in the rear.
In that way you ought to be able to find out where he is going and,
possibly, what he is doing there."

The scheme, thanks to the quick thinking of the men assigned to the job,
worked splendidly for months--at least it worked in so far as keeping a
watch on Weimar was concerned. But that was all. In the summer of 1915
the government knew precisely where Weimar had been for the past six
months, with whom he had talked, and so on--but the kernel of the nut
was missing. There wasn't the least clue to what he had talked about and
what deviltry he had planned!

Without that information, all the dope the government had was about as
useful as a movie to a blind man.

Washington was so certain that Weimar had the key to a number of very
important developments--among them the first attempt to blow up the
Welland Canal--that the chief of the Secret Service made a special trip
to New York to talk to Kenney.

"Isn't it possible," he suggested, "to plant your men close enough to
Weimar to find out, for example, what he talks about over the phone?"

Kenney smiled, grimly.

"Chief," he said, "that's been done. We've tapped every phone that
Weimar's likely to use in the neighborhood of his house and every time
he talks from a public station one of our men cuts in from near-by--by
an arrangement with Central--and gets every word. But that bird is too
wary to be caught with chaff of that kind. He's evidently worked out a
verbal code of some kind that changes every day. He tells the man at the
other end, for example, to be at the drug store on the corner of
Seventy-third and Broadway at three o'clock to-morrow afternoon and wait
for a phone call in the name of Williams. Our man is always at the place
at the appointed hour, but no call ever arrives. 'Seventy-third and
Broadway' very evidently means some other address, but it's useless to
try and guess which one. You'd have to have a man at every pay station
in town to follow that lead."

"How about overhearing his directions to the men he meets in the open?"

"Not a chance in the world. His rendezvous are always public places--the
Pennsylvania or Grand Central Station, a movie theater, a hotel lobby,
or the like. There he can put his back against the wall and make sure
that no one is listening in. He's on to all the tricks of the trade and
it will take a mighty clever man--or a bunch of them--to nail him."

"H-m-m!" mused the chief. "Well, at that, I believe I've got the man."

"Anyone I know?"

"Yes, I think you do--Morton Maxwell. Remember him? Worked on the
Castleman diamond case here a couple of years ago for the customs people
and was also responsible for uncovering the men behind the sugar-tax
fraud. He isn't in the Service, but he's working for the Department of
Justice, and I'm certain they'll turn him loose on this if I ask them
to. Maxwell can get to the bottom of Weimar's business, if anyone can.
Let me talk to Washington--"

And within an hour after the chief had hung up the receiver Morton
Maxwell, better known as "Mort," was headed toward New York with
instructions to report at Secret Service headquarters in that city.

Once there, the chief and Kenney went over the whole affair with him.
Cottrell and Gary and the other men who had been engaged in shadowing
the elusive Weimar were called in to tell their part of the story, and
every card was laid upon the table.

When the conference concluded, sometime after midnight, the chief turned
to Maxwell and inquired:

"Well, what's your idea about it?"

For a full minute Mort smoked on in silence and gazed off into space.
Men who had just met him were apt to think this a pose, a play to the
grand stand--but those who knew him best realized that Maxwell's alert
mind was working fastest in such moments and that he much preferred not
to make any decision until he had turned things over in his head.

"There's just one point which doesn't appear to have been covered," he
replied. Then, as Kenney started to cut in, "No, Chief, I said
_appeared_ not to have been covered. Very possibly you have all the
information on it and forgot to hand it out. Who does this Weimar live
with?"

"He lives by himself in a house on Twenty-fourth Street, near Seventh
Avenue--boards there, but has the entire second floor. So far as we've
been able to find out he has never been married. No trace of any wife on
this side, anyhow. Never travels with women--probably afraid they'd talk
too much."

"Has he any relatives?"

"None that I know of--"

"Wait a minute," Cottrell interrupted. "I dug back into Weimar's record
before the war ended his official connection with the steamship company,
and one of the points I picked up was that he had a cousin--a man named
George Buch--formerly employed on one of the boats.

"Where is Buch now?" asked Maxwell.

"We haven't been able to locate him," admitted the police detective.
"Not that we've tried very hard, because the trail didn't lead in his
direction. I don't even know that he is in this country, but it's likely
that he is because he was on one of the boats that was interned here
when the war broke."

Again it was a full minute before Maxwell spoke.

"Buch," he said, finally, "appears to be the only link between Weimar
and the outer world. It's barely possible that he knows something, and,
as we can't afford to overlook any clue, suppose we start work along
that line. I'll dig into it myself the first thing in the morning, and I
certainly would appreciate any assistance that your men could give me,
Chief. Tell them to make discreet inquiries about Buch, his appearance,
habits, etc., and to try and find out whether he is on this side. Now
I'm going to turn in, for something seems to tell me that the busy
season has arrived."

At that Maxwell wasn't far wrong. The weeks that followed were well
filled with work, but it was entirely unproductive of results. Weimar
was shadowed day and night, his telephones tapped and his mail examined.
But, save for the fact that his connection with the German embassy
became increasingly apparent, no further evidence was forthcoming.

The search for Buch was evidently futile, for that personage appeared to
have disappeared from the face of the earth. All that Maxwell and the
other men who worked on the matter could discover was that Buch--a young
Austrian whose description they secured--had formerly been an intimate
of Weimar. The latter had obtained his appointment to a minor office in
the Hamburg-American line and Buch was commonly supposed to be a stool
pigeon for the master plotter.

But right there the trail stopped.

No one appeared to know whether the Austrian was in New York, or the
United States, for that matter, though one informant did admit that it
was quite probable.

"Buch and the big fellow had a row the last time over," was the
information Maxwell secured at the cost of a few drinks. "Something
about some money that Weimar is supposed to have owed him--fifteen
dollars or some such amount. I didn't hear about it until afterward, but
it appears to have been a pretty lively scrap while it lasted. Of
course, Buch didn't have a chance against the big fellow--he could
handle a bull. But the young Austrian threatened to tip his hand--said
he knew a lot of stuff that would be worth a good deal more money than
was coming to him, and all that sort of thing. But the ship docked the
next day and I haven't seen or heard of him since."

The idea of foul play at once leaped into Maxwell's mind, but
investigation of police records failed to disclose the discovery of
anybody answering to the description of George Buch and, as Captain
Kenney pointed out, it is a decidedly difficult matter to dispose of a
corpse in such a way as not to arouse at least the suspicions of the
police.

As a last resort, about the middle of September, Maxwell had a reward
posted on the bulletin board of every police station in New York and the
surrounding country for the "apprehension of George Buch, Austrian, age
about twenty-four. Height, five feet eight inches. Hair, blond.
Complexion, fair. Eyes, blue. Sandy mustache."

As Captain Kenney pointed out, though, the description would apply to
several thousand men of German parentage in the city, and to a good many
more who didn't have a drop of Teutonic blood in their veins.

"True enough," Maxwell was forced to admit, "but we can't afford to
overlook a bet--even if it is a thousand-to-one shot."

As luck would have it, the thousand-to-one shot won!

On September 25, 1917, Detective Gary returned to headquarters,
distinctly crestfallen. Weimar had given him the slip.

In company with another man, whom the detective did not know, the
Austrian had been walking up Sixth Avenue that afternoon when a machine
swung in from Thirty-sixth Street and the Austrian had leaped aboard
without waiting for it to come to a full stop.

"Of course, there wasn't a taxi in sight," said Gary, ruefully, "and
before I could convince the nearest chauffeur that my badge wasn't phony
they'd gone!"

"That's the first time in months," Gary replied. "He knows that he's
followed, all right, and he's cagy enough to keep in the open and
pretend to be aboveboard."

"Right," commented the Department of Justice operative, "and this move
would appear to indicate that something was doing. Better phone all your
stations to watch out for him, Cap."

But nothing more was seen or heard of Herr Weimar for five days.

Meanwhile events moved rapidly for Maxwell.

On September 26th, the day after the Austrian disappeared, one of the
policemen whose beat lay along Fourteenth Street, near Third Avenue,
asked to see the government detective.

"My name's Riley," announced the copper, with a brogue as broad as the
toes of his shoes. "Does this Austrian, this here Buch feller ye're
lookin' for, like music? Is he nuts about it?"

"Music?" echoed Maxwell. "I'm sure I don't know.... But wait a minute!
Yes, that's what that chap who used to know him on the boat told me.
Saying he was forever playing a fiddle when he was off duty and that
Weimar threw it overboard one day in a fit of rage. Why? What's the
connection?"

"Nothin' in particular, save that a little girl I'm rather sweet on
wurruks in a music store on Fourteenth Street an' she an' I was talkin'
things over last night an' I happened to mintion th' reward offered for
this Buch feller. 'Why!' says she, 'that sounds just like the Dutchy
that used to come into th' shop a whole lot a year or so ago. He was
crazy about music an' kep' himself pretty nigh broke a-buyin' those
expensive new records. Got me to save him every violin one that came
out.'"

"Um, yes," muttered Maxwell, "but has the young lady seen anything of
this chap lately?"

"That she has not," Riley replied, "an' right there's th' big idear.
Once a week, regular, another Dutchman comes in an' buys a record, an'
he told Katy--that's me gurrul's name--last winter that th' selections
were for a man that used to be a stiddy customer of hers but who was now
laid up in bed."

"In bed for over a year!" exclaimed Maxwell, his face lighting up. "Held
prisoner somewhere in the neighborhood of that shop on Fourteenth
Street, because the big Austrian hasn't the nerve to make away with him
and yet fears that he knows too much! Look here, Riley--suppose you and
Miss Katy take a few nights off--I'll substitute for her and make it all
right with the man who owns the store. Then I can get a line on this
buyer of records for sick men."

"Wouldn't it be better, sir, if we hung around outside th' store an' let
Katy give us the high sign when he come in? Then we could both trail him
back to where he lives."

"You're right, Riley, it would! Where'll I meet you to-night?"

"At the corner of Fourteenth Street and Thoid Av'nue, at eight o'clock.
Katy says th' man never gets there before nine."

"I'll be there," said Maxwell--and he was.

But nothing out of the ordinary rewarded their vigil the first night,
nor the second. On the third night, however, just after the clock in the
Metropolitan Tower had boomed nine times, a rather nondescript
individual sauntered into the music store, and Riley's quick eyes saw
the girl behind the counter put her left hand to her chest. Then she
coughed.

"That's th' signal, sir," warned the policeman in a whisper. "An' that's
the guy we're after."

Had the man turned around as he made his way toward a dark and
forbidding house on Thirteenth Street, not far from Fourth Avenue, he
might have caught sight of two shadows skulking along not fifty feet
behind him. But, at that, he would have to have been pretty quick--for
Maxwell was taking no chances on losing his prey and he had cautioned
the policeman not to make a sound.

When their quarry ascended the steps of No. 247 Riley started to move
after him, but the Department of Justice operative halted him.

"There's no hurry," stated Maxwell. "He doesn't suspect we're here, and,
besides, it doesn't make any difference if he does lock the door--I've
got a skeleton key handy that's guaranteed to open anything."

Riley grunted, but stayed where he was until Maxwell gave the signal to
advance.

Once inside the door, which responded to a single turn to the key, the
policeman and the government agent halted in the pitch-black darkness
and listened. Then from an upper floor came the sound for which Maxwell
had been waiting--the first golden notes of a violin played by a master
hand. The distance and the closed doorway which intervened killed all
the harsh mechanical tone of the phonograph and only the wonderful
melody of "Drigo's Serenade" came down to them.

On tiptoe, though they knew their movements would be masked by the
sounds of the music, Riley and Maxwell crept up to the third floor and
halted outside the door from which the sounds came.

"Wait until the record is over," directed Maxwell, "and then break down
that door. Have your gun handy and don't hesitate to shoot anyone who
tries to injure Buch. I'm certain he's held prisoner here and it may be
that the men who are guarding him have instructions not to let him
escape at any cost. Ready? Let's go!"

The final note of the Kreisler record had not died away before Riley's
shoulder hit the flimsy door and the two detectives were in the room.

Maxwell barely had time to catch a glimpse of a pale, wan figure on the
bed and to sense the fact that there were two other men in the room,
when there was a shout from Riley and a spurt of flame from his
revolver. With a cry, the man nearest the bed dropped his arm and a
pistol clattered to the floor--the barrel still singing from the impact
of the policeman's bullet. The second man, realizing that time was
precious, leaped straight toward Maxwell, his fingers reaching for the
agent's throat. With a half laugh Mort clubbed his automatic and brought
the butt down with sickening force on his assailant's head. Then he
swung around and covered the man whom Riley had disarmed.

"Don't worry about him, sir," said the policeman. "His arm'll be numb
half an hour from now. What do you want to do with th' lad in th' bed?"

"Get him out of here as quickly as we can. We won't bother with these
swine. They have the law on their side, anyway, because we broke in here
without a warrant. I only want Buch."

When he had propped the young Austrian up in a comfortable chair in the
Federal Building and had given him a glass of brandy to strengthen his
nerves--the Lord only knows that they'll have to do in the
future--Maxwell got the whole story and more than he had dared hoped
for. Buch, following his quarrel with Weimar, had been held prisoner in
the house on Thirteenth Street for over a year because, as Maxwell had
figured, the Austrian didn't have the nerve to kill him and didn't dare
let him loose. Barely enough food was allowed to keep him alive, and the
only weakness that his cousin had shown was in permitting the purchase
of one phonograph record a week in order to cheer him up a little.

"Naturally," said Buch, "I chose the Kreisler records, because he's an
Austrian and a marvelous violinist."

"Did Weimar ever come to see you?" inquired Maxwell.

"He came in every now and then to taunt me and to say that he was going
to have me thrown in the river some day soon. That didn't frighten me,
but there were other things that did. He came in last week, for example,
and boasted that he was going to blow up a big canal and I was afraid he
might be caught or killed. That would have meant no more money for the
men who were guarding me and I was too weak to walk even to the window
to call for help...."

"A big canal!" Maxwell repeated. "He couldn't mean the Panama! No,
that's impossible. I have it! The Welland Canal!" And in an instant he
was calling the Niagara police on the long-distance phone, giving a
detailed description of Weimar and his companions.

       *       *       *       *       *

"As it turned out," concluded Quinn, reaching for his empty glass,
"Weimar had already been looking over the ground. He was arrested,
however, before the dynamite could be planted, and, thanks to Buch's
evidence, indicted for violation of Section Thirteen of the Penal Code.

"Thus did a phonograph record and thirty pieces of silver--the thirty
half-dollars that Weimar owed Buch--lead directly to the arrest of one
of the most dangerous spies in the German service. Let's have Mr.
Drigo's Serenade once more and pledge Mort Maxwell's health in ginger
ale--unless you have a still concealed around the house. And if you have
I will be in duty bound to tell Jimmy Reynolds about it--he's the lad
that holds the record for persistency and cleverness in discovering
moonshiners."




VII

THE SECRET STILL


"July 1, 1919," said Bill Quinn, as he appropriately reached for a
bottle containing a very soft drink, "by no means marked the beginning
of the government's troubles in connection with the illicit manufacture
of liquor.

"Of course, there's been a whole lot in the papers since the Thirst of
July about people having private stills in their cellars, making drinks
with a kick out of grape juice and a piece of yeast, and all that sort
of thing. One concern in Pittsburgh, I understand, has also noted a
tremendous and absolutely abnormal increase in the demand for its
hot-water heating plants--the copper coils of which make an ideal
substitute for a still--but I doubt very much if there's going to be a
real movement in the direction of the private manufacture of alcoholic
beverages. The Internal Revenue Department is too infernally watchful
and its agents too efficient for much of that to get by.

"When you get right down to it, there's no section in the country where
the art of making 'licker' flourishes to such an extent as it does in
eastern Tennessee and western North Carolina. Moonshine there is not
only a recognized article of trade, but its manufacture is looked upon
as an inalienable right. It's tough sledding for any revenue officer who
isn't mighty quick on the trigger, and even then--as Jimmy Reynolds
discovered a few years back--they're likely to get him unless he mixes
brains with his shooting ability."

       *       *       *       *       *

Reynolds [continued Quinn, easing his injured leg into a more
comfortable position] was as valuable a man as any whose name ever
appeared in the Government Blue Book. He's left the bureau now and
settled down to a life of comparative ease as assistant district
attorney of some middle Western city. I've forgotten which one, but
there was a good reason for his not caring to remain in the East. The
climate west of the Mississippi is far more healthy for Jimmy these
days.

At the time of the Stiles case Jim was about twenty-nine, straight as an
arrow, and with a bulldog tenacity that just wouldn't permit of his
letting go of a problem until the solution was filed in the official
pigeonholes which answer to the names of archives. It was this trait
which led Chambers, then Commissioner of Internal Revenue, to send for
him, after receipt of a message that two of his best men--Douglas and
Wood, I think their names were--had been brought back to Maymead,
Tennessee, with bullet holes neatly drilled through their hearts.

"Jim," said the Commissioner, "this case has gone just far enough. It's
one thing for the mountaineers of Tennessee to make moonshine whisky and
defy the laws of the United States. But when they deliberately murder
two of my best men and pin a rudely scribbled note to 'Bewair of this
country' on the front of their shirts, that's going entirely too far.
I'm going to clean out that nest of illicit stills if it takes the rest
of my natural life and every man in the bureau!

"More than that, I'll demand help from the War Department, if necessary!
By Gad! I'll teach 'em!" and the inkwell on the Commissioner's desk
leaped into the air as Chambers's fist registered determination.

Reynolds reached for a fresh cigar from the supply that always reposed
in the upper drawer of the Commissioner's desk and waited until it was
well lighted before he replied.

"All well and good, Chief," he commented, "but how would the army help
you any? You could turn fifty thousand men in uniform loose in those
mountains, and the odds are they wouldn't locate the bunch you're after.
Fire isn't the weapon to fight those mountaineers with. They're too
wise. What you need is brains."

"Possibly you can supply that deficiency," retorted the Commissioner, a
little nettled.

"Oh, I didn't mean that you, personally, needed the brains," laughed
Reynolds. "The pronoun was used figuratively and collectively. At that,
I would like to have a whirl at the case if you've nothing better for me
to do--"

"There isn't anything better for anyone to do at the present time,"
Chambers interrupted. "That's why I sent for you. We know that whisky is
being privately distilled in large quantities somewhere in the mountains
not far from Maymead. Right there our information ends. Our men have
tried all sorts of dodges to land the crowd behind the stills, but the
only thing they've been able to learn is that a man named Stiles is one
of the ruling spirits. His cabin is well up in the mountains and it was
while they were prospecting round that part of the country that Douglas
and Wood were shot. Now what's your idea of handling the case?"

"The first thing that I want, Chief, is to be allowed to work on this
absolutely alone, and that not a soul, in bureau or out of it is to know
what I'm doing."

"Easy enough to arrange that," assented the Commissioner, "but--"

"There isn't any 'but,'" Reynolds cut in. "You've tried putting a number
of men to work on this and they've failed. Now try letting one handle
it. For the past two years I've had a plan in the back of my head that
I've been waiting the right opportunity to use. So far as I can see it's
foolproof and I'm willing to take all the responsibility in connection
with it."

"Care to outline it?" inquired Chambers.

"Not right at the moment," was Reynolds's reply, "because it would seem
too wild and scatterbrained. I don't mind telling you, though, that for
the next six weeks my address will be in care of the warden of the
penitentiary of Morgantown, West Virginia, if you wish to reach me."

"Morgantown?" echoed the Commissioner. "What in Heaven's name are you
going to do there?"

"Lay the stage setting for the first act," smiled Jimmy. "Likewise
collect what authors refer to as local color--material that's essential
to what I trust will be the happy ending of this drama--happy, at least,
from the government's point of view. But, while you know that I'm at
Morgantown, I don't want anyone else to know it and I'd much prefer that
you didn't communicate with me there unless it's absolutely necessary."

"All right, I won't. You're handling the case from now on."

"Alone?"

"Entirely--if you wish it."

"Yes, Chief, I do wish it. I can promise you one of two things within
the next three months: either you'll have all the evidence you want
about the secret still and the men behind it or--well, you know where to
ship my remains!"

With that and a quick handshake he was gone.

During the weeks that followed, people repeatedly asked the
Commissioner:

"What's become of Jimmy Reynolds? Haven't seen him round here for a
month of Sundays."

But the Commissioner would assume an air of blank ignorance, mutter
something about, "He's out of town somewhere," and rapidly change the
subject.

About six weeks or so later a buzzard which was flapping its lazy way
across the mountains which divide Tennessee from North Carolina saw, far
below, a strange sight. A man, haggard and forlorn, his face covered
with a half-inch of stubble, his cheeks sunken, his clothing torn by
brambles and bleached by the sun and rain until it was almost impossible
to tell its original texture, stumbled along with his eyes fixed always
on the crest of a hill some distance off. It was as if he were making a
last desperate effort to reach his goal before the sun went down.

Had the buzzard been so minded, his keen eyes might have noted the fact
that the man's clothes were marked by horizontal stripes, while his head
was covered with hair the same length all over, as if he had been shaved
recently and the unkempt thatch had sprouted during the last ten days.

Painfully but persistently the man in convict's clothes pressed forward.
When the sun was a little more than halfway across the heavens he
glimpsed a cabin tucked away on the side of a mountain spur not far
away. At the sight he pressed forward with renewed vigor, but distances
are deceptive in that part of the country and it was not until nearly
dark that he managed to reach his destination.

In fact, the Stiles family was just sitting down to what passes for
supper in that part of the world--fat bacon and corn bread,
mostly--when there was the sound of a man's footstep some fifty feet
away.

Instantly the houn' dog rose from his accustomed place under the table
and crouched, ready to repel invaders. Old Man Stiles--his wife called
him Joe, but to the entire countryside he was just "Old Man
Stiles"--reached for his rifle with a muttered imprecation about
"Rev'nue officers who never let a body be."

But the mountaineer had hardly risen from his seat when there was a
sound as of a heavy body falling against the door--and then silence.

Stiles looked inquiringly at his wife and then at Ruth, their adopted
daughter. None of them spoke for an appreciable time, but the hound
continued to whine and finally backed off into a corner.

"Guess I'll have to see what et is," drawled the master of the cabin,
holding his rifle ready for action.

Slowly he moved toward the door and cautiously, very cautiously, he
lifted the bolt that secured it. Even if it were a revenue officer, he
argued to himself, his conscience was clear and his premises could stand
the formality of a search because, save for a certain spot known to
himself alone, there was nothing that could be considered incriminating.

As the door swung back the body of a man fell into the room--a man whose
clothing was tattered and whose features were concealed under a week's
growth of stubbly beard. Right into the cabin he fell, for the door had
supported his body, and, once that support was removed, he lay as one
dead.

In fact, it wasn't until at least five minutes had elapsed that Stiles
came to the conclusion that the intruder was really alive, after all.
During that time he had worked over him in the rough mountain fashion,
punching and pulling and manhandling him in an effort to secure some
sign of life. Finally the newcomer's eyes opened and he made an effort
to sit up.

"Wait a minute, stranger," directed Stiles, motioning his wife toward a
closet in the corner of the room. Mrs. Stiles--or 'Ma,' as she was known
in that part of the country--understood the movement. Without a word she
opened the cupboard and took down a flask filled with a clear
golden-yellow liquid. Some of this she poured into a cracked cup on the
table and handed it to her husband.

"Here," directed the mountaineer, "throw yo' haid back an' drink this.
Et's good fur what ails yer."

The moment after he had followed instructions the stranger gulped,
gurgled, and gasped as the moonshine whisky burnt its way down his
throat. The man-sized drink, taken on a totally empty stomach, almost
nauseated him. Then it put new life in his veins and he tried to
struggle to his feet.

Ruth Stiles was beside him in an instant and, with her father's help,
assisted him to a chair at the table.

"Stranger," said Stiles, stepping aside and eying the intruder
critically, "I don't know who or what you are, but I do know that yo'
look plumb tuckered out. Nobody's goin' hungry in my house, so fall to
an' we'll discuss other matters later."

Whereupon he laid his rifle in its accustomed place, motioned to his
wife and daughter to resume their places at the table, and dragged up
another chair for himself.

Beyond a word or two of encouragement to eat all he wanted of the very
plain fare, none of the trio addressed the newcomer during the remainder
of the meal. All three of them had noted the almost-obliterated stripes
that encircled his clothing and their significance was unmistakable.
But Stiles himself was far from being convinced. He had heard too much
of the tricks of government agents to be misled by what might prove,
after all, only a clever disguise.

Therefore, when the womenfolk had cleared away the supper things and the
two men had the room to themselves, the mountaineer offered his guest a
pipeful of tobacco and saw to it that he took a seat before the fire
where the light would play directly upon his features. Then he opened
fire.

"Stranger," he inquired, "what might yo' name be?"

"Patterson," said the other. "Jim Patterson."

"Whar you come from?"

"Charlestown first an' Morgantown second. Up for twelve years for
manslaughter--railroaded at that," was Patterson's laconic reply.

"How'd you get away?"

At that the convict laughed, but there was more of a snarl than humor in
his tone as he answered: "Climbed th' wall when th' guards weren't
lookin'. They took a coupla pot shots at me, but none of them came
within a mile. Then I beat it south, travelin' by night an' hidin' by
day. Stole what I could to eat, but this country ain't overly well
filled with farms. Hadn't had a bite for two days, 'cept some berries,
when I saw your cabin an' came up here."

Stiles puffed away in silence for a moment. Then he rose, as if to fetch
something from the other side of the room. Once behind Patterson,
however, he reached forward and, seizing the stubble that covered his
face, yanked it as hard as he could.

"What th'----?" yelled the convict, springing to his feet and
involuntarily raising his clenched hand.

"Ca'm yo'self, stranger, ca'm yo'self," directed the mountaineer, with
a half smile. "Jes' wanted to see for myself ef that beard was real,
that's all. Thought you might be a rev'nue agent in disguise."

"A rev'nue agent?" queried Patterson, and then as if the thought had
just struck him that he was in the heart of the moonshining district, he
added: "That's rich! Me, just out of th' pen an' you think I'm a bull.
That's great. Here"--reaching into the recesses of his frayed
shirt--"here's something that may convince you."

And he handed over a tattered newspaper, more than a week old, and
pointed to an article on the first page.

"There, read that!"

"Ruth does all th' reading for this fam'ly," was Stiles's muttered
rejoinder. "Ruth! Oh, Ruth! Come here a minute an' read somethin' to yo'
pappy!"

Patterson had not failed to note, during supper, that Ruth Stiles came
close to being a perfect specimen of a mountain flower, rough and
undeveloped, but with more than a trace of real beauty, both in her face
and figure. Standing in front of the fire, with its flickering light
casting a sort of halo around her, she was almost beautiful--despite her
homespun dress and shapeless shoes.

Without a word the convict handed her the paper and indicated the
article he had pointed out a moment before.

"Reward offered for convict's arrest," she read. "James Patterson, doing
time for murder, breaks out of Morgantown. Five hundred dollars for
capture. Prisoner scaled wall and escaped in face of guards' fire." Then
followed an account of the escape, the first of its kind in several
years.

"Even if you can't read," said Patterson, "there's my picture under the
headline--the picture they took for the rogues' gallery," and he pointed
to a fairly distinct photograph which adorned the page.

Stiles took the paper closer to the fire to secure a better look,
glanced keenly at the convict, and extended his hand.

"Guess that's right, stranger," he admitted. "You're no rev'nue agent."

Later in the evening, as she lay awake, thinking about the man who had
shattered the monotony of their mountain life, Ruth Stiles wondered if
Patterson had not given vent to what sounded suspiciously like a sigh of
relief at that moment. But she was too sleepy to give much thought to
it, and, besides, what if he had?...

In the other half of the cabin, divided from the women's room only by a
curtain of discolored calico, slept Patterson and Stiles--the former
utterly exhausted by his travels, the latter resting with keen hair
trigger consciousness of danger always only a short distance away.
Nothing happened, however, to disturb the peace of the Stiles domicile.
Even the hound slept quietly until the rosy tint of the eastern sky
announced another day.

After breakfast, at which the fat-back and corn bread were augmented by
a brownish liquid which passed for coffee, Stiles informed his guest
that he "reckoned he'd better stick close to th' house fer a few days,"
as there was no telling whether somebody might not be on his trail.

Patterson agreed that this was the proper course and put in his time
helping with the various chores, incidentally becoming a little better
acquainted with Ruth Stiles. That night he lay awake for several hours,
but nothing broke the stillness save a few indications of animal life
outside the cabin and the labored breathing of the mountaineer in the
bunk below him.

For three nights nothing occurred. But on the fourth night, Saturday,
supper was served a little earlier than usual and Patterson noted just a
suspicion of something almost electrical in the air. He gave no
indication of what he had observed, however, and retired to his bunk in
the usual manner. After an hour or more had elapsed he heard Stiles slip
quietly off his mattress and a moment later there was the guarded
scratch of a match as a lantern was lighted.

Suspecting what would follow, Patterson closed his eyes and continued
his deep, regular breathing. But he could sense the fact that the
lantern had been swung up to a level with his bunk and he could almost
feel the mountaineer's eyes as Stiles made certain that he was asleep.
Stifling an impulse to snore or do something to convince his host that
he wasn't awake, Patterson lay perfectly still until he heard the door
close. Then he raised himself guardedly on one elbow and attempted to
look through the window beside the bunk. But a freshly applied coat of
whitewash prevented that, so he had to content himself with listening.

Late in the night--so late that it was almost morning--he heard the
sounds of men conversing in whispers outside the cabin, but he could
catch nothing beyond his own name. Soon Stiles re-entered the room,
slipped into bed, and was asleep instantly.

So things went for nearly three weeks. The man who had escaped from
prison made himself very useful around the cabin, and, almost against
his will, found that he was falling a victim to the beauty and charm of
the mountain girl.

"I mustn't do it," he told himself over and over again. "I can't let
myself! It's bad enough to come here and accept the old man's
hospitality, but the girl's a different proposition."

It was Ruth herself who solved the riddle some three weeks after
Patterson's arrival. They were wandering through the woods together,
looking for sassafras roots, when she happened to mention that Stiles
was not her own father.

"He's only my pappy," she said, "my adopted father. My real father was
killed when I was a little girl. Shot through the head because he had
threatened to tell where a still was hidden. He never did believe in
moonshining. Said it was as bad as stealin' from the government. So
somebody shot him and Ma Stiles took me in, 'cause she said she was
sorry for me even if my pa was crazy."

"Do you believe that moonshining is right?" asked her companion.

"Anything my pa believed was the truth," replied the girl, her eyes
flashing. "Everybody round these parts knows that Pappy Stiles helps run
the big still the rev'nue officers been lookin' for the past three
years. Two of 'em were shot not long ago, too--but that don't make it
right. 'Specially when my pa said it was wrong. What you smilin' at?"

Patterson resisted an inclination to tell her that the smile was one of
relief and replied that he was just watching the antics of a chipmunk a
little way off. But that night he felt a thrill of joy as he lay,
listening as always, in his bunk.

Things had been breaking rather fast of late. The midnight gatherings
had become more frequent and, convinced that he had nothing to fear from
his guest, Stiles was not as cautious as formerly. He seldom took the
trouble to see that the escaped prisoner was asleep and he had even been
known to leave the door unlatched as he went out into the night.

That night, for example, was one of the nights that he was
careless--and, as usually happens, he paid dearly for it.

Waiting until Stiles was well out of the house, Patterson slipped
silently out of his bunk in his stocking feet and, inch by inch,
reopened the door. Outside, the moon was shining rather brightly, but,
save for the retreating figure of the mountaineer--outlined by the
lantern he carried--there was nothing else to be seen.

Very carefully Patterson followed, treading softly so as to avoid even
the chance cracking of a twig. Up the mountainside went Stiles and, some
fifty feet behind him, crouched the convict, his faded garments blending
perfectly with the underbrush. After half a mile or so of following a
rude path, Stiles suddenly disappeared from view--not as if he had
turned a corner, but suddenly, as if the earth had swallowed him.

After a moment Patterson determined to investigate. When he reached the
spot where he had last seen Stiles he looked around and almost stumbled
against the key to the entire mystery. There in the side of the mountain
was an opening, the entrance to a natural cave, and propped against it
was a large wooden door, completely covered with vines.

"Not a chance of finding it in the daytime unless you knew where it
was," thought the convict as he slipped silently into the cave. Less
than thirty feet farther was an abrupt turn, and, glancing round this,
Patterson saw what he had been hoping for--a crowd of at least a dozen
mountaineers gathered about a collection of small but extremely
efficient stills. Ranged in rows along the sides of the cave were scores
of kegs, the contents of which were obvious from the surroundings.

Pausing only long enough to make certain of his bearings, the convict
returned to the cabin and, long before Stiles came back, was sound
asleep.

It was precisely four weeks from the day when the buzzard noted the man
on the side of the mountain, when a sheriff's posse from another county,
accompanied by half a dozen revenue officers, rode clattering through
Maymead and on in the direction of the Stiles cabin. Before the
mountaineers had time to gather, the posse had surrounded the hill,
rifles ready for action.

Stiles himself met them in front of his rude home and, in response to
his challenge as to what they wanted, the sheriff replied that he had
come for a prisoner who had escaped from Morgantown a month or so
before. Stiles was on the verge of declaring that he had never heard of
the man when, to his amazement, Patterson appeared from the woods and
surrendered.

The instant the convict had gained the shelter of the government guns,
however, a startling change took place. He held a moment's whispered
conversation with one of the revenue officials and the latter slipped
him a spare revolver from his holster. Then--"Hands up!" ordered the
sheriff, and Stiles's hands shot above his head.

Leaving three men to guard the cabin and keep watch over Old Man Stiles,
whose language was searing the shrubbery, the remainder of the posse
pushed up the mountain, directed by the pseudoconvict. It took them some
time to locate the door to the cave, but, once inside, they found all
the evidence they wanted--evidence not only directly indicative of
moonshining, but the two badges which had belonged to Douglas and Wood
and which the mountaineers had kept as souvenirs of the shooting, thus
unwittingly providing a firm foundation for the government's case in
court.

The next morning, when Commissioner Chambers reached his office, he
found upon his desk a wire which read:

     Stiles gang rounded up without the firing of a single shot.
     Direct evidence of complicity in Woods-Douglas murders.
     Secret still is a secret no longer.

The signature to the telegram was "James Reynolds, alias Jim Patterson."

"Jim Patterson," mused the commissioner. "Where have I heard that
name.... Of course. He's the prisoner that broke out of Morgantown a
couple of months ago! Jimmy sure did lay the local color on thick!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"But," I inquired, as Quinn paused, "don't you consider that rather a
dirty trick on Reynolds's part--worming himself into the confidence of
the mountaineers and then betraying them? Besides, what about the girl?"

"Dirty trick!" snorted the former Secret Service agent. "Would you think
about ethics if some one had murdered two of the men you work next to in
the office? It was the same thing in this case. Jimmy knew that if he
didn't turn up that gang they'd probably account for a dozen of his
pals--to say nothing of violating the law every day they lived! What
else was there for him to do?

"The girl? Oh, Reynolds married her. They sometimes do that, even in
real life, you know. As I said, they're living out in the Middle West,
for Ruth declared she never wanted to see a mountain again, and both of
them admitted that it wouldn't be healthy to stick around within walking
distance of Tennessee. That mountain crowd is a bad bunch to get r'iled,
and it must be 'most time for Stiles and his friends to get out of jail.

"It's a funny thing the way these government cases work out. Here was
one that took nearly three months to solve, and the answer was the
direct result of hard work and careful planning--while the Trenton
taxicab tangle, for example, was just the opposite!"




VIII

THE TAXICAB TANGLE


We'd been sitting on the front porch--Bill Quinn and I--discussing
things in general for about half an hour when the subject of
transportation cropped up and, as a collateral idea, my mind jumped to
taxicabs, for the reason that the former Secret Service operative had
promised to give me the details of a case which he referred to as "The
Trenton Taxicab Tangle."

"Yes," he replied, reminiscently, when I reminded him of the
alliterative title and inquired to what it might refer, "that was one of
the branch cases which grew out of the von Ewald chase--you remember
Mary McNilless and the clue of Shelf Forty-five? Well, Dick Walters, the
man who landed von Ewald, wasn't the only government detective working
on that case in New York--not by some forty-five or fifty--and Mary
wasn't the only pretty woman mixed up in it, either. There was that girl
at the Rennoc switchboard....

"That's another story, though. What you want is the taxicab clue."

       *       *       *       *       *

If you remember the incidents which led up to the von Ewald affair
[continued Quinn, as he settled comfortably back in his chair] you will
recall that the German was the slipperiest of slippery customers. When
Walters stumbled on his trail, through the quick wit of Mary McNilless,
there wasn't the slightest indication that there was such a man. He was
a myth, a bugaboo--elusive as the buzz of a mosquito around your ear.

During the months they scoured New York in search for him, a number of
other cases developed. Some of these led to very interesting
conclusions, but the majority, as usual, flivvered into thin air.

The men at headquarters, the very cream of the government services,
gathered from all parts of the country, were naturally unable to
separate the wheat from the chaff in advance. Night after night they
went out on wild-goose chases and sometimes they spent weeks in
following a promising lead--to find only blue sky and peaceful scenery
at the end of it.

Alan Whitney, who had put in two or three years rounding up
counterfeiters for the Service, and who had been transferred to the
Postal Inspection Service at the time of those registered mail robberies
in the Middle West--only to be detailed to Secret Service work in
connection with the von Ewald case--was one of the bitterest opponents
of this forced inaction.

"I don't mind trouble," Whitney would growl, "but I do hate this eternal
strain of racing around every time the bell goes off and then finding
that some bonehead pulled the alarm for the sheer joy of seeing the
engines come down the street. There ought to be a law against
irresponsible people sending in groundless 'tips'--just as there's a law
against scandal or libel or any other information that's not founded on
fact."

But, just the same, Al would dig into every new clue with as much
interest and energy as the rest of the boys--for there's always the
thrill of thinking that the tip you're working on may be the right one
after all.

Whitney was in the office one morning when the phone rang and the chief
answered it.

"Yes," he heard the chief say, "this is the right place--but if your
information is really important I would suggest that you come down and
give it in person. Telephones are not the most reliable instruments in
the world."

A pause followed and the chief's voice again:

"Well, of course we are always very glad to receive information that
tends to throw any light on those matters, but I must confess that yours
sounds a little vague and far-fetched. Maybe the people in the taxi
merely wanted to find a quiet place to talk.... They got out and were
away for nearly two hours? Hum! Thanks very much. I'll send one of our
men over to talk to you about it, if you don't mind. What's the
address?"

A moment or two later, after the chief had replaced the receiver, he
called out to Whitney and with a smile that he could barely conceal told
him to catch the next train to Trenton, where, at a certain address, he
would find a Miss Vera Norton, who possessed--or thought she
possessed--information which would be of value to the government in
running down the people responsible for recent bomb outrages and
munition-plant explosions.

"What's the idea, Chief?" inquired Al.

"This young lady--at least her voice sounded young over the phone--says
that she got home late from a party last night. She couldn't sleep
because she was all jazzed up from dancing or something, so she sat near
her window, which looks out upon a vacant lot on the corner. Along about
two o'clock a taxicab came putt-putting up the street, stopped at the
corner, and two men carrying black bags hopped out. The taxicab remained
there until nearly four o'clock--three-forty-eight, Miss Norton's watch
said--and then the two men came back, without the bags, jumped in, and
rolled off. That's all she knows, or, at least, all she told.

"When she picked up the paper round eleven o'clock this mornin' the
first thing that caught her eye was the attempt to blow up the powder
plant 'bout two miles from the Norton home. One paragraph of the story
stated that fragments of a black bag had been picked up near the scene
of the explosion, which only wrecked one of the outhouses, and the young
lady leaped to the conclusion that her two night-owls were mixed up in
the affair. So she called up to tip us off and get her name in history.
Better run over and talk to her. There might be something to the
information, after all."

"Yes, there _might_," muttered Whitney, "but it's getting so nowadays
that if you walk down the street with a purple tie on, when some one
thinks you ought to be wearing a green one, they want you arrested as a
spy. Confound these amateurs, anyhow! I'm a married man, Chief. Why
don't you send Giles or one of the bachelors on this?"

"For just that reason," was the reply. "Giles or one of the others would
probably be impressed by the Norton's girl's blond hair--it must be
blond from the way she talked--and spend entirely too much time running
the whole thing to earth. Go on over and get back as soon as you can. We
can't afford to overlook anything these days--neither can we afford to
waste too much time on harvesting crops of goat feathers. Beat it!"

And Whitney, still protesting, made his way to the tube and was lucky
enough to catch a Trenton train just about to pull out of the station.

Miss Vera Norton, he found, was a blond--and an extremely pretty one, at
that. Moreover, she appeared to have more sense than the chief had given
her credit for. After Whitney had talked to her for a few minutes he
admitted to himself that it was just as well that Giles hadn't tackled
the case--he might never have come back to New York, and Trenton isn't a
big enough place for a Secret Service man to hide in safety, even when
lured by a pair of extremely attractive gray-blue eyes.

Apart from her physical charms, however, Whitney was forced to the
conclusion that what she had seen was too sketchy to form anything that
could be termed a real clue.

"No," she stated, in reply to a question as to whether she could
identify the men in the taxi, "it was too dark and too far off for me to
do that. The arc light on the corner, however, gave me the impression
that they were of medium height and rather thick set. Both of them were
dressed in dark suits of some kind and each carried a black leather bag.
That's what made me think that maybe they were mixed up in that
explosion last night."

"What kind of bags were they?"

"Gladstones, I believe you call them. Those bags that are flat on the
bottom and then slant upward and lock at the top."

"How long was the taxi there?"

"I don't know just when it did arrive, for I didn't look at my watch
then, but it left at twelve minutes to four. I was getting mighty
sleepy, but I determined to see how long it would stay in one place, for
it costs money to hire a car by the hour--even one of those
Green-and-White taxis."

"Oh, it was a Green-and-White, eh?"

"Yes, and I got the number, too," Miss Norton's voice fairly thrilled
with the enthusiasm of her detective ability. "After the men had gotten
out of the car I remembered that my opera glasses were on the bureau and
I used them to get a look at the machine. I couldn't see anything of the
chauffeur beyond the fact that he was hunched down on the front seat,
apparently asleep, and the men came back in such a hurry that I didn't
have time to get a good look at them through the glasses."

"But the number," Whitney reminded her.

"I've got it right here," was the reply, as the young lady dug down into
her handbag and drew out a card. "N. Y. four, three, three, five, six,
eight," she read. "I got that when the taxi turned around and headed
back--to New York, I suppose. But what on earth would two men want to
take a taxi from New York all the way to Trenton for? Why didn't they
come on the train?"

"That, Miss Norton," explained Whitney, "is the point of your story that
makes the whole thing look rather suspicious. I will confess that when
the chief told me what you had said over the phone I didn't place much
faith in it. There might have been a thousand good reasons for men
allowing a local taxi to wait at the corner, but the very fact of its
bearing a New York number makes it a distinctly interesting incident."

"Then you think that it may be a clue, after all?"

"It's a clue, all right," replied the operative, "but what it's a clue
to I can't say until we dig farther into the matter. It is probable that
these two men had a date for a poker party or some kind of celebration,
missed the train in New York, and took a taxi over rather than be left
out of the party. But at the same time it's distinctly within the realms
of possibility that the men you saw were implicated in last night's
explosion. It'll take some time to get at the truth of the matter and,
meanwhile, might I ask you to keep this information to yourself?"

"Indeed I shall!" was the reply. "I won't tell a soul, honestly."

After that promise, Al left the Norton house and made his way across
town to where the munitions factory reared its hastily constructed head
against the sky. Row after row of flimsy buildings, roofed with tar
paper and giving no outward evidence of their sinister mission in
life--save for the high barbed-wire fence that inclosed them--formed the
entire plant, for there shells were not made, but loaded, and the
majority of the operations were by hand.

When halted at the gate, Whitney found that even his badge was of no use
in securing entrance. Evidently made cautious by the events of the
preceding night, the guard refused to admit anyone, and even hesitated
about taking Al's card to the superintendent. The initials "U. S. S. S."
finally secured him admittance and such information as was available.

This, however, consisted only of the fact that some one had cut the
barbed wire at an unguarded point and had placed a charge of explosive
close to one of the large buildings. The one selected was used
principally as a storehouse. Otherwise, as the superintendent indicated
by an expressive wave of his hand, "it would have been good night to the
whole place."

"Evidently they didn't use a very heavy charge," he continued, "relying
upon the subsequent explosions from the shells inside to do the damage.
If they'd hit upon any other building there'd be nothing but a hole in
the ground now. As it is, the damage won't run over a few thousand
dollars."

"Were the papers right in reporting that you picked some fragments of a
black bag not far from the scene of the explosion?" Whitney asked.

"Yes, here they are," and the superintendent produced three pieces of
leather from a drawer in his desk. "Two pieces of the top and what is
evidently a piece of the side."

Whitney laid them on the desk and examined them carefully for a few
moments. Then:

"Notice anything funny about these?" he inquired.

"No. What's the matter?"

"Not a thing in the world, except that the bag must have had a very
peculiar lock."

"What's that?"

"Here--I'll show you," and Whitney tried to put the two pieces of metal
which formed the lock together. But, inasmuch as both of them were
slotted, they wouldn't join.

"Damnation!" exclaimed the superintendent. "What do you make of that?"

"That there were two bags instead of one," stated Whitney, calmly.
"Coupled with a little information which I ran into before I came over
here, it begins to look as if we might land the men responsible for this
job before they're many hours older."

Ten minutes later he was on his way back to New York, not to report at
headquarters, but to conduct a few investigations at the headquarters of
the Green-and-White Taxicab Company.

"Can you tell me," he inquired of the manager in charge, "just where
your taxi bearing the license number four, three, three, five, six,
eight was last night?"

"I can't," said the manager, "but we'll get the chauffeur up here and
find out in short order.

"Hello!" he called over an office phone. "Who has charge of our cab
bearing license number four, three, three, five, six, eight?... Murphy?
Is he in?... Send him up--I'd like to talk to him."

A few moments later a beetle-jawed and none too cleanly specimen of the
genus taxi driver swaggered in and didn't even bother to remove his cap
before sitting down.

"Murphy," said the Green-and-White manager, "where was your cab last
night?"

"Well, let's see," commenced the chauffeur. "I took a couple to the
Amsterdam The-ayter in time for th' show an' then picked up a fare on
Broadway an' took him in the Hunnerd-an'-forties some place. Then I
cruised around till the after-theater crowd began to come up an'--an' I
got one more fare for Yonkers. Another long trip later on made it a
pretty good night."

"Murphy," cut in Whitney, edging forward into the conversation, "where
and at just what hour of the night did those two Germans offer you a
hundred dollars for the use of your car all evening?"

"They didn't offer me no hunnerd dollars," growled the chauffeur, "they
gave me...." Then he checked himself suddenly and added, in an
undertone, "I don't know nothin' 'bout no Goimans."

"The hell you don't!" snarled Whitney, edging toward the door. "Back up
against that desk and keep your hands on top of it, or I'll pump holes
clean through you!"

His right hand was in his coat pocket, the fingers closed around what
was very palpably the butt of an automatic. Murphy could see the outline
of the weapon and obeyed instructions, while Whitney slammed the door
with his left hand.

"Now look here," he snapped, taking a step nearer to the taxi driver, "I
want the truth and I want it quick! Also, it's none of your business why
I want it! But you better come clean if you know what's good for you.
Out with it! Where did you meet 'em and where did you drive 'em?"

Realizing that escape was cut off and thoroughly cowed by the display of
force, Murphy told the whole story--or as much of it as he knew.

"I was drivin' down Broadway round Twenty-eig't Street last night, 'bout
ten o'clock," he confessed. "I'd taken that couple to the the-ayter,
just as I told you, an' that man up to Harlem. Then one of these t'ree
guys hailed me...."

"Three?" interrupted Whitney.

"That's what I said--t'ree! They said they wanted to borrow my machine
until six o'clock in th' mornin' an' would give me two hunnerd dollars
for it. I told 'em there was nothin' doin' an' they offered me
two-fifty, swearin' that they'd have it back at th' same corner at six
o'clock sharp. Two hunnerd an' fifty bones being a whole lot more than I
could make in a night, I gambled with 'em an' let 'em have th' machine,
makin' sure that I got the coin foist. They drove off, two of 'em
inside, an' I put in th' rest of th' night shootin' pool. When I got to
th' corner of Twenty-eig't at six o'clock this mornin', there wasn't any
sign of 'em--but th' car was there, still hot from the hard ride they
give her. That's all I know--'shelp me Gawd!"

"Did the men have any bags with them?"

"Bags? No, not one."

"What did they look like?"

"The one that talked with me was 'bout my heig't an' dressed in a dark
suit. He an' th' others had their hats pulled down over their eyes, so's
I couldn't see their faces."

"Did he talk with a German accent?"

"He sure did. I couldn't hardly make out what he was sayin'. But his
money talked plain enough."

"Yes, and it's very likely to talk loud enough to send you to the pen if
you're not careful!" was Whitney's reply. "If you don't want to land
there, keep your mouth shut about this. D'you get me?"

"I do, boss, I do."

"And you've told me all the truth--every bit of it?"

"Every little bit."

"All right. Clear out!"

When Murphy left the room, Whitney turned to the manager and, with a wry
smile, remarked: "Well, we've discovered where the car came from and how
they got it. But that's all. We're really as much in the dark as
before."

"No," replied the manager, musingly. "Not quite as much. Possibly you
don't know it, but we have a device on every car that leaves this garage
to take care of just such cases as this--to prevent drivers from running
their machines all over town without pulling down the lever and then
holding out the fares on us. Just a minute and I'll show you.

"Joe," he called, "bring me the record tape of Murphy's machine for last
night and hold his car till you hear from me."

"This tape," he explained, a few minutes later, "is operated something
along the lines of a seismograph or any other instrument for detecting
change in direction. An inked needle marks these straight lines and
curves all the time the machine is moving, and when it is standing still
it oscillates slightly. By glancing at these tapes we can tell when any
chauffeur is holding out on us, for it forms a clear record--not only of
the distance the machine has traveled, but of the route it followed."

"Doesn't the speedometer give you the distance?" asked Whitney.

"Theoretically, yes. But it's a very simple matter to disconnect a
speedometer, while this record is kept in a locked box and not one
driver in ten even knows it's there. Now, let's see what Murphy's record
tape tells us....

"Yes, here's the trip to the theater around eight-thirty. See the sharp
turn from Fifth Avenue into Forty-second Street, the momentary stop in
front of the Amsterdam, and the complete sweep as he turned around to
get back to Broadway. Then there's the journey up to the Bronx or Harlem
or wherever he went, another complete turn and an uninterrupted trip
back down on Broadway."

"Then this," cut in Whitney, unable to keep the excitement out of his
voice, "is where he stopped to speak to the Germans?"

"Precisely," agreed the other, "and, as you'll note, that stop was
evidently longer than either of the other two. They paid their fares,
while Murphy's friends had to be relieved of two hundred and fifty
dollars."

"From there on is what I'm interested in," announced Whitney. "What does
the tape say?"

"It doesn't _say_ anything," admitted the manager, with a smile. "But it
_indicates_ a whole lot. In fact, it blazes a blood-red trail that you
ought to be able to follow with very little difficulty. See, when the
machine started it kept on down Broadway--in fact, there's no sign of a
turn for several blocks."

"How many?"

"That we can't tell--now. But we can figure it up very accurately later.
The machine then turned to the right and went west for a short distance
only--stopped for a few moments--and then went on, evidently toward the
ferry, for here's a delay to get on board, here's a wavy line evidently
made by the motion of the boat when the hand ought to have been
practically at rest, and here's where they picked up the trip to
Trenton. Evidently they didn't have to stop until they got there,
because we have yards of tape before we reach a stop point, and then the
paper is worn completely through by the action of the needle in
oscillating, indicative of a long period of inaction. The return trip is
just as plain."

"But," Whitney objected, "the whole thing hinges on where they went
before going to Trenton. Murphy said they didn't have any bags, so they
must have gone home or to some rendezvous to collect them. How are we
going to find the corner where the machine turned?"

"By taking Murphy's car and driving it very carefully south on Broadway
until the tape indicates precisely the distance marked on this one--the
place where the turn was made. Then, driving down that street, the
second distance shown on the tape will give you approximately the house
you're looking for!"

"Good Lord," exclaimed Whitney, "that's applying science to it! Sherlock
Holmes wasn't so smart, after all!"

Al and the manager agreed that there was too much traffic on Broadway in
the daytime or early evening to attempt the experiment, but shortly
after midnight, belated pedestrians might have wondered why a
Green-and-White taxicab containing two men proceeded down Broadway at a
snail's pace, while every now and then it stopped and one of the men got
out to examine something inside.

"I think this is the corner," whispered the garage manager to Whitney,
when they reached Eighth Street, "but to be sure, we'll go back and try
it over again, driving at a normal pace. It's lucky that this is a new
instrument and therefore very accurate."

The second trial produced the same result as the first--the place they
sought lay a few blocks west of Broadway, on Eighth.

Before they tried to find out the precise location of the house, Whitney
phoned to headquarters and requested loan of a score of men to assist
him in the contemplated raid.

"Tell 'em to have their guns handy," he ordered, "because we may have
to surround the block and search every house."

But the taxi tape rendered that unnecessary. It indicated any one of
three adjoining houses on the north side of the street, because, as the
manager pointed out, the machine had not turned round again until it
struck a north-and-south thoroughfare, hence the houses must be on the
north side.

By this time the reserves were on hand and, upon instructions from
Whitney, spread out in a fan-shaped formation, completely surrounding
the houses, front and rear. At a blast from a police whistle they
mounted the steps and, not waiting for the doors to be opened, went
through them shoulders first.

It was Whitney, who had elected to assist in the search of the center
house, who captured his prey in a third-floor bedroom.

Before the Germans knew what was happening Al was in the room, his
flashlight playing over the floor and table in a hasty search for
incriminating evidence. It didn't take long to find it, either. In one
corner, only partly concealed by a newspaper whose flaring headlines
referred to the explosion of the night before, was a collection of bombs
which, according to later expert testimony was sufficient to blow a
good-sized hole in the city of New York.

That was all they discovered at the time, but a judicious use of the
third degree--coupled with promises of leniency--induced one of the
prisoners to loosen up the next day and he told the whole
story--precisely as the taxi tape and Vera Norton had told it. The only
missing ingredient was the power behind the plot--the mysterious "No.
859"--whom Dick Walters later captured because of the clue on Shelf
forty-five.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So you see," commented Quinn as he finished, "the younger Pitt wasn't
so far wrong when he cynically remarked that 'there is a Providence that
watches over children, imbeciles, and the United States.' In this case
the principal clues were a book from the Public Library, the chance
observations of a girl who couldn't sleep and a piece of white paper
with some red markings on it.

"At that, though, it's not the first time that German agents have gotten
into trouble over a scrap of paper."

"What happened to Vera Norton?" I inquired.

"Beyond a little personal glory, not a thing in the world," replied
Quinn. "Didn't I tell you that Al was married? You're always looking for
romance, even in everyday life. Besides, if he had been a bachelor,
Whitney was too busy trying to round up the other loose ends of the
Ewald case. 'Number eight fifty-nine' hadn't been captured then, you
remember.

"Give me a match--my pipe's gone out. No, I can't smoke it here; it's
too late. But speaking of small clues that lead to big things, some day
soon I'll tell you the story of how a match--one just like this, for all
I know--led to the uncovering of one of the most difficult smuggling
cases that the Customs Service ever tried to solve."




IX

A MATCH FOR THE GOVERNMENT


"I wonder how long it will take," mused Bill Quinn, as he tossed aside a
copy of his favorite fictional monthly, "to remove the ethical
restrictions which the war placed upon novels and short stories? Did you
ever notice the changing style in villains, for example? A decade or so
ago it was all the rage to have a Japanese do the dirty work--for then
we were taking the 'yellow peril' rather seriously and it was reflected
in our reading matter. The tall, well-dressed Russian, with a sinister
glitter in his black eyes, next stepped upon the scene, to be followed
by the villain whose swarthy complexion gave a hint of his Latin
ancestry.

"For the past few years, of course, every real villain has had to have
at least a touch of Teutonic blood to account for the various
treacheries which he tackles. I don't recall a single novel--or a short
story, either--that has had an English or French villain who is foiled
in the last few pages. I suppose you'd call it the _entente cordiale_ of
the novelists, a sort of concerted attempt by the writing clan to do
their bit against the Hun. And mighty good propaganda it was, too....

"But, unfortunately, the detective of real life can't always tell by
determining a man's nationality whether he's going to turn out to be a
crook or a hero. When you come right down to it, every country has about
the same proportion of each and it's only by the closest observation
that one can arrive at a definite and fact-supported conclusion.

"Details--trifles unnoticed in themselves--play a far larger part in the
final dénouement than any preconceived ideas or fanciful theories. There
was the case of Ezra Marks and the Dillingham diamonds, for example...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ezra [continued the former Secret Service operative, when he had eased
his game leg into a position where it no longer gave him active trouble]
was all that the name implied. Born in Vermont, of a highly puritanical
family, he had been named for his paternal grandfather and probably also
for some character from the Old Testament. I'm not awfully strong on
that Biblical stuff myself.

It wasn't long after he grew up, however, that life on the farm began to
pall. He found a copy of the life of Alan Pinkerton somewhere and read
it through until he knew it from cover to cover. As was only natural in
a boy of his age, he determined to become a great detective, and drifted
down to Boston with that object in view. But, once in the city, he found
that "detecting" was a little more difficult than he had imagined, and
finally agreed to compromise by accepting a very minor position in the
Police Department. Luckily, his beat lay along the water front and he
got tangled up in two or three smuggling cases which he managed to
unravel in fine shape, and, in this way, attracted the attention of the
Customs Branch of the Treasury Department, which is always on the
lookout for new timber. It's a hard life, you know, and one which
doesn't constitute a good risk for an insurance company. So there are
always gaps to be filled--and Ezra plugged up one of them very nicely.

As might have been expected, the New Englander was hardly ever addressed
by his full name. "E. Z." was the title they coined for him, and "E. Z."
he was from that time on--at least to everyone in the Service. The
people on the other side of the fence, however, the men and women who
look upon the United States government as a joke and its laws as hurdles
over which they can jump whenever they wish--found that this Mark was
far from an easy one. He it was who handled the Wang Foo opium case in
San Diego in nineteen eleven. He nailed the gun runners at El Paso when
half a dozen other men had fallen down on the assignment, and there were
at least three Canadian cases which bore the imprint of his latent
genius on the finished reports.

His particular kind of genius was distinctly out of the ordinary, too.
He wasn't flashy and he was far from a hard worker. He just stuck around
and watched everything worth watching until he located the tip he
wanted. Then he went to it--and the case was finished!

The chap who stated that "genius is the capacity for infinite attention
to details" had Ezra sized up to a T. And it was one of these
details--probably the most trifling one of all--that led to his most
startling success.

Back in the spring of nineteen twelve the European agents of the
Treasury Department reported to Washington that a collection of uncut
diamonds, most of them rather large, had been sold to the German
representative of a firm in Rotterdam. From certain tips which they
picked up, however, the men abroad were of the opinion that the stones
were destined for the United States and advised that all German boats be
carefully watched, because the Dillingham diamonds--as the collection
was known--had been last heard of en route to Hamburg and it was to be
expected that they would clear from there.

The cablegram didn't cause any wild excitement in the Treasury
Department. European agents have a habit of trying to stir up trouble in
order to make it appear that they are earning their money and then they
claim that the people over here are not always alert enough to follow
their tips. It's the old game of passing the buck. You have to expect it
in any business.

But, as events turned out, the men on the other side were dead right.

Almost before Washington had time officially to digest the cable and to
mail out the stereotyped warnings based upon it, a report filtered in
from Wheeling, West Virginia, that one of the newly made coal
millionaires in that section had invested in some uncut diamonds as
large as the end of your thumb. The report came in merely as a routine
statement, but it set the customs authorities to thinking.

Uncut stones, you know, are hard to locate, either when they are being
brought in or after they actually arrive. Their color is dull and
slatelike and there is little to distinguish them from other and far
less valuable pebbles. Of course, there might not be the slightest
connection in the world between the Wheeling diamonds and those of the
Dillingham collection--but then, on the other hand, there might....

Hence, it behooved the customs people to put on a little more speed and
to watch the incoming steamers just as carefully as they knew how.

Some weeks passed and the department had sunk back into a state of
comfortable ease--broken only occasionally by a minor case or two--when
a wire arrived one morning stating that two uncut diamonds had appeared
in New York under conditions which appeared distinctly suspicious. The
owner had offered them at a price 'way under the market figure, and
then, rather than reply to one or two questions relative to the history
of the stones, had disappeared. There was no record of the theft of any
diamonds answering to the description of those seen in Maiden Lane, and
the police force inquired if Washington thought they could have been
smuggled.

"Of course they could," snorted the chief. "But there's nothing to prove
it. Until we get our hands upon them and a detailed description of the
Dillingham stones, it's impossible to tell."

So he cabled abroad for an accurate list of the diamonds which had been
sold a couple of months earlier, with special instructions to include
any identifying marks, as it was essential to spot the stones before a
case could be built up in court.

The following Tuesday a long dispatch from Rotterdam reached the
department, stating, among other things, that one of the Dillingham
diamonds could be distinguished by a heart-shaped flaw located just
below the surface. That same afternoon came another wire from New York
to the effect that two rough stones, answering to the description of the
ones alluded to in a previous message, had turned up in the jewelry
district after passing through half a dozen underground channels.

"Has one of the diamonds a heart-shaped flaw in it?" the chief inquired
by wire.

"It has," came back the response. "How did you know it?"

"I didn't," muttered the head of the Customs Service, "but I took a
chance. The odds were twenty to one against me, but I've seen these long
shots win before. Now," ringing for Mahoney, his assistant, "we'll see
what can be done to keep the rest of that collection from drifting
in--if it hasn't already arrived."

"Where's Marks located now?" the chief inquired when Mahoney entered.

"Somewhere in the vicinity of Buffalo, I believe. He's working on that
Chesbro case, the one in connection with--"

"I know," cut in the chief. "But that's pin money compared with this
matter of the Dillingham diamonds. Thousands of dollars are at stake
here, against hundreds there. Besides, if this thing ever leaks out to
the papers we'll never hear the last of it. The New York office isn't in
any too strong as it is. Wire Marks to drop the trail of those silk
hounds and beat it to New York as fast as he can. He'll find real work
awaiting him there--something that ought to prove a test of the
reputation he's built up on the other three borders. Hurry it up!"

"E. Z." found the message awaiting him when he returned to his hotel
that night, and without the slightest symptom of a grouch grabbed the
next train for New York. As he told me later, he didn't mind in the
least dropping the silk matter, because he had put in the better part of
a month on it and didn't seem any closer than when he started.

It took Ezra less than five minutes to get all the dope the New York
office had on the case--and it took him nearly six months to solve it.

"The two diamonds in Wheeling and the two that turned up here are the
only ones we know about," said the man in charge of the New York office.
"The original Dillingham collection contained twenty-one rough
stones--but whether the other seventeen have already been brought in or
whether the people who are handling them have shipped them elsewhere is
wholly problematical. The chief learned about the heart-shaped flaw from
our man at Rotterdam, so that identifies one of the stones. But at the
same time it doesn't help us in the least--for we can't handle the case
from this end."

"Same rules as on the Coast, eh?" inquired Marks.

"Precisely. You've got to tackle the other end of the game. No rummaging
around here, trying to pick up the trail that ends with the stone in
Maiden Lane. As you know, this bunch is pretty well organized, wheels
within wheels and fences on fences. You get something on one of them and
the rest of the crowd will perjure themselves black in the face to get
him off, with the result that your case will be laughed out of court and
the man you're really after--the chap who's running the stones under
your nose--is a thousand miles away with a grin on his face. You've got
to land him first and the others later, if the chief wants them. The
chances are, though, that he'll be well satisfied to have the goods on
the crook that's doing the main part of the work."

"Well," drawled Marks, "I trust he gets his satisfaction. Got any ideas
on the matter?"

"Nary an idea. The stones were sold abroad and presumably they were
headed for Hamburg--which would appear to point to a German boat. Four
of them, supposedly--one of them, certainly--turned up here without
passing through the office or paying the customary duty. Now go to it!"

When Marks got back to his hotel and started to think the problem over,
he had to admit that there wasn't very much to "go to." It was the
thinnest case he had ever tackled--a perfect circle of a problem,
without the slightest sign of a beginning, save the one which was
barred.

Anxious as he was to make good, he had to concede that the department's
policy of working from the other end of the case was the right course to
follow. He had heard of too many arrests that fell flat, too many weary
weeks of work that went for nothing--because the evidence was
insufficient--not to realize the justice of the regulations that
appeared to hamper him.

"No," he thought, as he half dreamed over a pipe-load of tobacco, "the
case seems to be impregnable. But there must be some way to jimmy into
it if you try long enough."

His first move was the fairly obvious one of searching the newspaper
files to discover just what ships had docked during the ten days
previous to the appearance of the stones in Wheeling. But this led
nowhere, because that week had been a very busy one in maritime circles.
The _Celtic_, the _Mauretania_, the _Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse_, the
_Kronprinzessin Cecelie_, the _Deutschland_ and a host of other smaller
vessels had landed within that time.

Just as a check upon his observations, he examined the records for the
week preceding the first appearance of the diamonds in New York. Here
again he ran into a snag, but one which enabled him to eliminate at
least half of the vessels he had considered before. However, there still
remained a sufficient number to make it impossible to watch all of them
or even to fix upon two or three which appeared more suspicious than the
others.

The information from abroad pointed to the fact that a German boat was
carrying the diamonds, but, Marks figured, there was nothing in the
world to prevent the stones from being taken into England or France or
Italy and reshipped from there. They had turned up in the United States,
so why couldn't they have been slipped through the customs of other
countries just as easily?

The one point about the whole matter that appeared significant to him
was that two stones had been reported in each case--a pair in Wheeling
and another pair in New York. This evidence would be translated either
to mean that the smugglers preferred to offer the diamonds in small
lots, so as not to center suspicion too sharply in their movements, or
that the space which they used to conceal the stones was extremely
limited.

Marks inclined to the latter theory, because two stones, rather than
one, had been offered in each instance. If the whole lot had been run
in, he argued, the men responsible would market them singly, rather than
in pairs. This would not detract in the slightest from the value of the
stones, as it isn't easy to match rough diamonds and thus increase their
market value.

Having settled this matter to his own satisfaction and being convinced
that, as not more than two stones were being run in at one time, it
would take at least eight more trips to import the entire shipment,
"E. Z." settled down to a part of the government detective's work which
is the hardest and the most necessary in his life--that which can best
be characterized by the phrase "watchful waiting."

For weeks at a time he haunted the docks and wharves along the New York
water front. His tall, angular figure became a familiar sight at every
landing place and his eyes roamed restlessly over the crowds that came
down the gangplank. In a number of instances he personally directed the
searching of bags and baggage which appeared to be suspicious. Save for
locating a few bolts of valuable lace and an oil painting concealed in
the handle of a walking stick which was patently hollow, he failed to
turn up a thing.

The only ray of hope that he could glimpse was the fact that, since he
had been assigned to the case, four more stones had been reported--again
in pairs. This proved that his former reasoning had been correct and
also that the smugglers evidently intended to bring in all of the
twenty-one stones, two at a time. But when he came to catalog the hiding
places which might be used to conceal two articles of the size of the
stones already spotted, he was stumped. The list included a walking
stick, the heels of a pair of women's shoes, two dummy pieces of candy
concealed in a box of real confections, a box of talcum, a bag of
marbles, the handle of an umbrella, or any one of a number of other
trinkets which travelers carry as a matter of course or bring home as
curios or gifts.

Finally, after two solid months of unproductive work, he boarded the
midnight train for Washington and strolled into the chief's office the
following morning, to lay his cards on the table.

"Frankly," he admitted, "I haven't accomplished a thing. I'm as far from
breaking into the circle as I was at the beginning, and, so far as I can
see, there isn't any hope of doing it for some time to come."

"Well," inquired the chief, "do you want to be relieved of the case or
do you want me to drop the matter entirely--to confess that the Customs
Service has been licked by a single clever smuggler?"

"Not at all!" and Marks's tone indicated that such a thought had never
entered his head. "I want the Service to stick with the case and I want
to continue to handle it. But I do want a definite assurance of time."

"How much time?"

"That I can't say. The only lead I've located--and that isn't sufficient
to be dignified by the term 'clue'--will take weeks and probably months
to run to earth. I don't see another earthly trail to follow, but I
would like to have time to see whether this one leads anywhere."

"All right," agreed the chief, fully realizing what "E. Z." was up
against and not being hurried by any pressure from the outside--for the
case had been carefully kept out of the newspapers--"this is September.
Suppose we say the first of the year? How does that suit you?"

"Fair enough, if that's the best you can do."

"I'm afraid it is," was the comment from across the desk, "because
that's all the case is worth to us. Your time is valuable and we can't
afford to spend a year on any case--unless it's something as big as the
sugar frauds. Stick with it until New Year's, and if nothing new
develops before then we'll have to admit we're licked and turn you loose
on something else."

"Thanks, Chief," said Marks, getting up from his chair. "You can depend
upon my doing everything possible in the next three months to locate the
leak and I surely appreciate your kindness in not delivering an
ultimatum that you want the smuggler or my job. But then I guess you
know that I couldn't work any harder than I'm going to, anyhow."

"Possibly," agreed the head of the Service, "and then, again, it may be
because I have confidence that you'll turn the trick within the year.
Want any help from this end?"

"No, thanks. This looks like a one-man game and it ought not to take
more than one man to finish it. A whole bunch of people always clutter
up the place and get you tangled in their pet theories and personal
ideas. What I would like, though, is to be kept in close touch with any
further developments concerning stones that appear later on--where they
are located--their exact weight and diameter, and any other facts that
might indicate a possible hiding place."

"You'll get that, all right," promised the chief. "And I trust that
you'll develop a red-hot trail of your own before January first."

With that Marks shook hands and started back to New York, fairly well
pleased with the results of his trip, but totally disgusted with the
lack of progress which he had made since leaving Buffalo.

Early in October a message from Washington informed him that a couple of
uncut diamonds had turned up in Cincinnati, stones which answered to the
description of a pair in the Dillingham collection.

Around the 10th of November another pair was heard from in Boston, and
anyone who was familiar with Marks and his methods would have noted a
tightening of the muscles around his mouth and a narrowing of his eyes
which always indicated that he was nearing the solution of a difficulty.

After receiving the November message he stopped haunting the wharves and
commenced to frequent the steamship offices of the Hamburg-American,
North German Lloyd and Llanarch lines. The latter, as you probably know,
is operated by Welsh and British capital and runs a few small boats
carrying passengers who would ordinarily travel second class, together
with a considerable amount of freight.

When the first day of December dawned, Marks drew a deep-red circle
around the name of the month on his calendar and emitted a prayerful
oath, to the effect he'd "be good and eternally damned if that month
didn't contain an unexpected Christmas present for a certain person." He
made no pretense of knowing who the person was--but he did feel that he
was considerably closer to his prey than he had been five months before.

Fate, as some one has already remarked, only deals a man a certain
number of poor hands before his luck changes. Sometimes it gets worse,
but, on the average, it improves. In Ezra Marks's case Fate took the
form of a storm at sea, one of those winter hurricanes that sweep
across the Atlantic and play havoc with shipping.

Ezra was patiently waiting for one of three boats. Which one, he didn't
know--but by the process of elimination he had figured to a mathematical
certainty that one of them ought to carry two uncut diamonds which were
destined never to visit the customs office. Little by little, through
the months that had passed, he had weeded out the ships which failed to
make port at the time the diamonds arrived--calculating the time by the
dates on which the stones appeared elsewhere--and there were only three
ships left. One of them was a North German Lloyder, the second belonged
to the Hamburg-American fleet, and the third possessed an
unpronounceable Welsh name and flew the pennant of the Llanarch line.

As it happened, the two German ships ran into the teeth of the gale and
were delayed three days in their trip, while the Welsh boat missed the
storm entirely and docked on time.

Two days later came a message from Washington to the effect that two
diamonds, uncut, had been offered for sale in Philadelphia.

"Have to have one more month," replied Marks. "Imperative! Can
practically guarantee success by fifteenth of January"--for that was the
date on which the Welsh ship was due to return.

"Extension granted," came the word from Washington. "Rely on you to make
good. Can't follow case any longer than a month under any
circumstances."

Marks grinned when he got that message. The trap was set, and, unless
something unforeseen occurred, "E. Z." felt that the man and the method
would both be in the open before long.

When the Welsh ship was reported off quarantine in January, Marks
bundled himself into a big fur coat and went down the bay in one of the
government boats, leaving instructions that, the moment the ship docked,
she was to be searched from stem to stern.

"Don't overlook as much as a pill box or a rat hole," he warned his
assistants, and more than a score of men saw to it that his instructions
were carried out to the letter.

Beyond exhibiting his credentials, Marks made no effort to explain why
the ship was under suspicion. He watched the deck closely to prevent the
crew from throwing packages overboard, and as soon as they reached dock
he requested all officers to join him in one of the big rooms belonging
to the Customs Service. There he explained his reasons for believing
that some one on board was guilty of defrauding the government out of
duty on a number of uncut diamonds.

"What's more," he concluded, at the end of an address which was
purposely lengthy in order to give his men time to search the ship, "I
am willing to stake my position against the fact that two more diamonds
are on board the ship at this moment!"

Luckily, no one took him up--for he was wrong.

The captain, pompous and self-assertive, preferred to rise and rant
against the "infernal injustice of this high-handed method."

Marks settled back to listen in silence and his fingers strayed to the
side pocket of his coat where his pet pipe reposed. His mind strayed to
the thought of how his men were getting along on the ship, and he
absent-mindedly packed the pipe and struck a match to light it.

It was then that his eye fell upon the man seated beside him--Halley,
the British first mate of the steamer. He had seen him sitting there
before, but had paid little attention to him. Now he became aware of
the fact that the mate was smoking a huge, deep-bowled meerschaum pipe.
At least, it had been in his mouth ever since he entered, ready to be
smoked, but unlighted.

Almost without thinking about it, Marks leaned forward and presented the
lighted match, holding it above the mate's pipe.

"Light?" he inquired, in a matter-of-fact tone.

To his amazement, the other started back as if he had been struck, and
then, recovering himself, muttered: "No, thanks. I'm not smoking."

"Not smoking?" was the thought that flashed through Marks's head, "then
why--"

But the solution of the matter flashed upon him almost instantly. Before
the mate had time to move, Marks's hand snapped forward and seized the
pipe. With the same movement he turned it upside down and rapped the
bowl upon the table. Out fell a fair amount of tobacco, followed by two
slate-colored pebbles which rolled across the table under the very eyes
of the captain!

"I guess that's all the evidence we need!" Marks declared, with a laugh
of relief. "You needn't worry about informing your consul and entering a
protest, Captain Williams. I'll take charge of your mate and these
stones and you can clear when you wish."




X

THE GIRL AT THE SWITCHBOARD


"When you come right down to it," mused Bill Quinn, "women came as near
to winning the late but unlamented war as did any other single factor.

"The Food Administration placarded their statement that 'Food Will Win
the War' broadcast throughout the country, and that was followed by a
whole flock of other claimants, particularly after the armistice was
signed. But there were really only two elements that played a leading
role in the final victory--men and guns. And women backed these to the
limit of their powerful ability--saving food, buying bonds, doing extra
work, wearing a smile when their hearts were torn, and going 'way out of
their usual sphere in hundreds of cases--and making good in practically
every one of them.

"So far as we know, the Allied side presented no analogy to Mollie
Pitcher or the other heroines of past conflicts, for war has made such
forward steps that personal heroism on the part of women is almost
impossible. Of course, we had Botchkareva and her 'Regiment of Death,'
not to mention Edith Cavell, but the list is not a long one.

"When it is finally completed, however, there are a few names which the
public hasn't yet heard which will stand well toward the front. For
example, there was Virginia Lang--"

"Was she the girl at the switchboard that you mentioned in connection
with the von Ewald case?" I interrupted.

"That's the one," said Quinn, "and, what's more, she played a leading
role in that melodrama, a play in which they didn't use property guns or
cartridges."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Lang [continued Quinn] was one of the few women I ever heard of
that practically solved a Secret Service case "on her own." Of course,
in the past, the different governmental detective services have found it
to their advantage to go outside the male sex for assistance.

There have been instances where women in the employ of the Treasury
Department rendered valuable service in trailing smugglers--the matter
of the Deauville diamonds is a case in point--and even the Secret
Service hasn't been above using women to assist in running
counterfeiters to earth, while the archives of the State Department
would reveal more than one interesting record of feminine co-operation
in connection with underground diplomacy.

But in all these cases the women were employed to handle the work and
they were only doing what they were paid for, while Virginia Lang--

Well, in the first place, she was one of the girls in charge of the
switchboard at the Rennoc in New York. You know the place--that big
apartment hotel on Riverside Drive where the lobby is only a shade less
imposing than the bell-boys and it costs you a month's salary to speak
to the superintendent. They never have janitors in a place like that.

Virginia herself--I came to know her fairly well in the winter of
nineteen seventeen, after Dave Carroll had gone to the front--was well
qualified by nature to be the heroine of any story. Rather above the
average in size, she had luckily taken advantage of her physique to
round out her strength with a gymnasium course. But in spite of being a
big woman, she had the charm and personality which are more often found
in those less tall. When you couple this with a head of wonderful hair,
a practically perfect figure, eyes into which a man could look and,
looking, lose himself, lips which would have caused a lip stick to blush
and--Oh, what's the use? Words only caricature a beautiful woman, and,
besides, if you haven't gotten the effect already, there's nothing that
I could tell you that would help any.

In the spring of nineteen sixteen, when the von Ewald chase was at its
height, Miss Lang was employed at the Rennoc switchboard and it speaks
well for her character when I can tell you that not one of the bachelor
tenants ever tried a second time to put anything over. Virginia's eyes
could snap when they wanted to and Virginia's lips could frame a cutting
retort as readily as a pleasant phrase.

In a place like the Rennoc, run as an apartment hotel, the guests change
quite frequently, and it was some task to keep track of all of them,
particularly when there were three girls working in the daytime, though
only one was on at night. They took it by turns--each one working one
week in four at night and the other three holding down the job from
eight to six. So, as it happened, Virginia did not see Dave Carroll
until he had been there nearly a month. He blew in from Washington early
one evening and straightway absented himself from the hotel until
sometime around seven the following morning, following the schedule
right through, every night.

Did you ever know Carroll? He and I worked together on the Farron case
out in St. Louis, the one where a bookmaker at the races tipped us off
to the biggest counterfeiting scheme ever attempted in this country, and
after that he took part in a number of other affairs, including the one
which prevented the Haitian revolution in nineteen thirteen.

Dave wasn't what you would call good-looking, though he did have a way
with women. The first night that he came downstairs--after a good day's
sleep--and spotted Virginia Lang on the switchboard, he could have been
pardoned for wandering over and trying to engage her in a conversation.
But the only rise he got was from her eyebrows. They went up in that
"I-am-sure-I-have-never-met-you" manner which is guaranteed to be cold
water to the most ardent male, and the only reply she vouchsafed was
"What number did you wish?"

"You appear to have mine," Dave laughed, and then asked for Rector 2800,
the private branch which connected with the Service headquarters.

When he came out of the booth he was careful to confine himself to
"Thank you" and the payment of his toll. But there was something about
him that made Virginia Lang feel he was "different"--a word which, with
women, may mean anything--or nothing. Then she returned to the reading
of her detective story, a type of literature to which she was much
addicted.

Carroll, as you have probably surmised, was one of the more than
twoscore Government operatives sent to New York to work on the von Ewald
case. His was a night shift, with roving orders to wander round the
section in the neighborhood of Columbus Circle and stand ready to get
anywhere in the upper section of the city in a hurry in case anything
broke. But, beyond reporting to headquarters regularly every hour, the
assignment was not exactly eventful.

The only thing that was known about von Ewald at that time was that a
person using such a name--or alias--was in charge of the German
intrigues against American neutrality. Already nearly a score of bomb
outrages, attempts to destroy shipping, plots against munition plants,
and the like had been laid at his door, but the elusive Hun had yet to
be spotted. Indeed, there were many men in the Service who doubted the
existence of such a person, and of these Carroll was one.

But he shrugged his shoulders and stoically determined to bear the
monotony of strolling along Broadway and up, past the Plaza, to Fifth
Avenue and back again every night--a program which was varied only by an
occasional séance at Reisenweber's or Pabst's, for that was in the days
before the one-half of one per cent represented the apotheosis of liquid
refreshment.

It was while he was walking silently along Fifty-ninth Street, on the
north side, close to the Park, a few nights after his brush with
Virginia Lang, that Carroll caught the first definite information about
the case that anyone had obtained.

He hadn't noted the men until he was almost upon them, for the night was
dark and the operative's rubber heels made no sound upon the pavement.
Possibly he wouldn't have noticed them then if it hadn't been for a
phrase or two of whispered German that floated out through the
shrubbery.

"He will stay at Conner's" was what reached Carroll's ears. "That will
be our chance--a rare opportunity to strike two blows at once, one at
our enemy and the other at this smug, self-satisfied nation which is
content to make money out of the slaughter of Germany's sons. Once he is
in the hotel, the rest will be easy."

"How?" inquired a second voice.

"A bomb, so arranged to explode with the slightest additional pressure,
in a--"

"Careful," growled a third man. "Eight fifty-nine would hardly care to
have his plans spread all over New York. This cursed shrubbery is so
dense that there is no telling who may be near. Come!"

And Carroll, crouched on the outside of the fence which separates the
street from the Park, knew that seconds were precious if he was to get
any further information. A quick glance down the street showed him that
the nearest gate was too far away to permit of entrance in that manner.
So, slipping his automatic into the side pocket of his coat he leaped
upward and grasped the top of the iron fence. On the other side he could
hear the quick scuffle of feet as the Germans, alarmed, began to retreat
rapidly.

A quick upward heave, a purchase with his feet, and he was over, his
revolver in his hand the instant he lighted on the other side.

"Halt!" he called, more from force of habit than from anything else, for
he had no idea that any of the trio would stop.

But evidently one of them did, for from behind the shelter of a near-by
bush came the quick spat of a revolver and a tongue of flame shot toward
him. The bullet, however, sung harmlessly past and he replied with a
fusillade of shots that ripped through the bush and brought a shower of
German curses from the other side. Then another of the conspirators
opened fire from a point at right angles to the first, and the ruse was
successful, for it diverted Carroll's attention long enough to permit
the escape of the first man, and the operative was still flat on the
ground, edging his way cautiously forward when the Park police arrived,
the vanguard of a curious crowd attracted by the shots.

"What's the trouble?" demanded the "sparrow cop."

"None at all," replied Dave, as he slipped the still warm revolver into
his pocket and brushed some dirt from his sleeve. "Guy tried to hold me
up, that's all, and I took a pot shot at him. Cut it! Secret Service!"
and he cautiously flashed his badge in the light of the electric torch
which the park policeman held.

"Huh!" grunted the guard, as he made his way to the bush from behind
which Carroll had been attacked. "You evidently winged him. There's
blood on the grass here, but no sign of the bird himself. Want any
report to headquarters?" he added, in an undertone.

"Not a word," said Carroll. "I'm working this end of the game and I want
to finish it without assistance. It's the only thing that's happened in
a month to break the monotony and there's no use declaring anyone else
in on it. By the way, do you know of any place in town known as
Conner's?"

"Conner's? Never heard of it. Sounds as though it might be a dive in the
Bowery. Plenty of queer places down there."

"No, it's hardly likely to be in that section of the city," Dave stated.
"Farther uptown, I think. But it's a new one on me."

"On me, too," agreed the guard, "and I thought I knew the town like a
book."

When he reported to headquarters a few moments later, Carroll told the
chief over the wire of his brush with the trio of Germans, as well as
what he had heard. There was more than a quiver of excitement in the
voice from the other end of the wire, for this was the first actual
proof of the existence of the mysterious "No. 859."

"Still believe von Ewald is a myth?" inquired the Chief.

"Well, I wouldn't go so far as to say that," was the answer, "because
the bullet that just missed me was pretty material. Evidently some one
is planning these bomb outrages and it's up to us to nab him--if only
for the sake of the Service."

"Did you catch the name of the man to whom your friends were alluding?"
asked the chief.

"No, they just referred to him as 'he.'"

"That might mean any one of a number of people," mused the chief. "Sir
Cecil Spring-Rice is in town, you know. Stopping at the Waldorf. Then
there's the head of the French Mission at the Vanderbilt with a bunch of
people, and Lord Wimbledon, who's spent five million dollars for horses
in the West, stopping at the same place you are. You might keep an eye
on him and I'll send Kramer and Fleming up to trail the other two."

"Did you ever hear of the place they called Conner's, Chief?"

"No, but that doesn't mean anything. It may be a code word--a
prearranged name to camouflage the hotel in the event anyone were
listening in."

"Possibly," replied Carroll, just before he hung up, "but somehow I have
a hunch that it wasn't. I'll get back on the job and let you know if
anything further develops."

His adventure for the night appeared to have ended, for he climbed into
bed the following morning without having been disturbed, but lay awake
for an hour or more--obsessed with the idea that he really held the clue
to the whole affair, but unable to figure out just what it was.

Where was it that they intended to place the bomb? Why would they
arrange it so as to explode upon pressure, rather than concussion or by
a time fuse? Where was Conner's? Who was the man they were plotting
against?

These were some of the questions which raced through his brain, and he
awoke in the late afternoon still haunted by the thought that he really
ought to know more than he did.

That night at dinner he noted, almost subconsciously, that he was served
by a new waiter, a fact that rather annoyed him because he had been
particularly pleased at the service rendered by the other man.

"Where's Felix?" he inquired, as the new attendant brought his soup.

"He isn't on to-night, sir," was the reply. "He had an accident and
won't be here for a couple of days."

"An accident?"

"Yes, sir," was the laconic answer.

"Anything serious?"

"No, sir. He--he hurt his hand," and the waiter disappeared without
another word. Carroll thought nothing more of it at the time, but later,
over his coffee and a good cigar, a sudden idea struck him. Could it be
that Felix was one of the men whom he had surprised the night before,
the one he had fired at and hit? No, that was too much of a coincidence.
But then Felix was manifestly of foreign origin, and, while he claimed
to be Swiss, there was a distinct Teutonic rasp to his words upon
occasion.

Signaling to his waiter, Dave inquired whether he knew where Felix
lived. "I'd like to know if there is anything that I can do for him," he
gave as his reason for asking.

"I haven't the slightest idea," came the answer, and Carroll was aware
that the man was lying, for his demeanor was sullen rather than
subservient and the customary "sir" was noticeable by its absence.

Once in the lobby, Dave noticed that the pretty telephone operator was
again at the switchboard, and the idea occurred to him that he might
find out Felix's address from the hotel manager or head waiter.

"I understand that my waiter has been hurt in an accident," the
operative explained to the goddess of the wires, "and I'd like to find
out where he lives. Who would be likely to know?"

"The head waiter ought to be able to tell you," was the reply,
accompanied by the flash of what Carroll swore to be the whitest teeth
he had ever seen. "Just a moment and I will get him on the wire for
you." Then, after a pause, "Booth Number Five, please."

But Carroll got no satisfaction from that source, either. The head
waiter maintained that he knew nothing of Felix's whereabouts and hung
up the receiver in a manner which was distinctly final, not to say
impolite. The very air of mystery that surrounded the missing man was
sufficient to incline him to the belief that, after all, there might be
something to the idea that Felix was the man he had shot at the night
before. In that event, it was practically certain that Lord Wimbledon
was the object of the Germans' attention--but that didn't solve the
question of where the bomb was to be placed, nor the location of
"Conner's."

"Just the same," he muttered, half aloud, "I'm going to stick around
here to-night."

"Why that momentous decision?" came a voice almost at his elbow, a voice
which startled and charmed him with its inflection.

Looking up, he caught the eyes of the pretty telephone girl, laughing at
him.

"Talking to yourself is a bad habit," she warned him with a smile which
seemed to hold an apology for her brusqueness of the night before,
"particularly in your business."

"My business?" echoed Dave. "What do you know about that?"

"Not a thing in the world--except," and here her voice dropped to a
whisper--"except that you are a government detective and that you've
discovered something about Lord Wimbledon, probably some plot against
His Lordship."

"Where--how--what in the world made you think that?" stammered Carroll,
almost gasping for breath.

"Very simple," replied the girl. "Quite elementary, as Sherlock Holmes
used to say. You called the headquarters number every night when you
came down--the other girls tipped me off to that, for they know that I'm
fond of detective stories. Then everybody around here knows that Felix,
the waiter that you inquired about, is really German, though he pretends
to be Swiss, and that he, the head waiter, and the pastry cook are thick
as thieves."

"You'd hardly expect me to say 'Yes,' would you? Particularly as I am
supposed to be a government operative."

"Now I know you are," smiled the girl. "Very few people use the word
'operative.' They'd say 'detective' or 'agent.' But don't worry, I won't
give you away."

"Please don't," laughed Carroll, half banteringly, half in earnest, for
it would never do to have it leak out that a girl had not only
discovered his identity, but his mission. Then, as an after-thought, "Do
you happen to know of any hotel or place here in town known as
'Conner's'?" he asked.

"Why, of course," was the reply, amazing in its directness. "The
manager's name--" But then she halted abruptly, picked up a plug, and
said, "What number, please?" into the receiver.

Carroll sensed that there was a reason for her stopping in the middle of
her sentence and, looking around, found the pussy-footed head waiter
beside him, apparently waiting for a call. Silently damning the custom
that made it obligatory for waiters to move without making a sound,
Carroll wandered off across the lobby, determined to take a stroll
around the block before settling down to his night's vigil. A stop at
the information desk, however, rewarded him with the news that Lord
Wimbledon was giving a dinner in his apartments the following evening to
the British ambassador--that being all the hotel knew officially about
his Grace's movements.

"I'll take care to have half a dozen extra men on the job," Carroll
assured himself, "for that's undoubtedly the time they would pick if
they could get away with it. A single bomb then would do a pretty bit of
damage."

The evening brought no further developments, but shortly after midnight
he determined to call the Rennoc, in the hope that the pretty telephone
girl was still on duty and that she might finish telling him what she
knew of Conner's.

"Hotel Rennoc," came a voice which he recognized instantly.

"This is Dave Carroll speaking," said the operative. "Can you tell me
now what it was you started to say about Conner's?"

"Not now," came the whispered reply. Then, in a louder voice, "Just a
moment, please, and I'll see if he's registered." During the pause which
followed Dave realized that the girl must be aware that she was watched
by some one. Was it the silent-moving head waiter?

"No, he hasn't arrived yet," was the next phrase that came over the
wires, clearly and distinctly, followed by instructions, couched in a
much lower tone, "Meet me, Drive entrance, one-five sure," and then a
click as the plug was withdrawn.

It was precisely five minutes past one when Carroll paused in front of
the Riverside Drive doorway to the Rennoc, considering it the part of
discretion to keep on the opposite side of the driveway. A moment later
a woman, alone, left the hotel, glanced around quickly, and then crossed
to where he was standing.

"Follow me up the street," she directed in an undertone as she passed.
"Michel has been watching like a hawk."

Dave knew that Michel was the head waiter, and out of the corner of his
eye he saw a shadow slip out of another of the hotel doorways, farther
down the Drive, and start toward them. But when he looked around a
couple of blocks farther up the drive, there was no one behind them.

"Why all the mystery?" he inquired, as he stepped alongside the girl.

"Something's afoot in the Rennoc," she replied, "and they think I
suspect what it is and have told you about it. Michel hasn't taken his
eyes off me all evening. I heard him boast one night that he could read
lips, so I didn't dare tell you anything when you called up, even though
he was across the lobby. Conner's, the place you asked about, is the
Rennoc. Spell it backward. Conner is the manager--hence the name of the
hotel."

"Then," said Carroll, "that means that they've got a plan under way to
bomb Lord Wimbledon and probably the British ambassador at that dinner
to-morrow evening. I overheard one of them say last night that a bomb,
arranged to explode at the slightest pressure, would be placed in the--"
and then he stopped.

"In the cake!" gasped the girl, as if by intuition. But her next words
showed that her deduction had a more solid foundation. "This is to be a
birthday dinner, in honor of Lord Percy Somebody who's in Lord
Wimbledon's party, as well as in honor of Lord Cecil. The pastry cook,
who's almost certainly mixed up in the plot, has plenty of opportunity
to put the bomb there, where it would never be suspected. The instant
they cut the cake--"

But her voice trailed off in midair as something solid came down on her
head with a crash. At the same moment Dave was sent reeling by a blow
from a blackjack, a blow which sent him spinning across the curb and
into the street. He was dimly aware that two men were leaping toward him
and that a third was attacking the telephone girl.

Panting, gasping, fighting for time in which to clear his head of the
effects of the first blow, Carroll fought cautiously, but desperately,
realizing that his opponents desired to avoid gun-play for fear of
attracting the police. A straight left to the jaw caught one of the men
coming in and knocked him sprawling, but the second, whom Carroll
recognized as Michel, was more wary. He dodged and feinted with the
skill of a professional boxer, and then launched an uppercut which went
home on the point of Dave's jaw.

It was at that moment that the operative became aware of another
participant in the fray--a figure in white with what appeared to be a
halo of gold around her head. The thought flashed through his mind that
he must be dreaming, but he had sense enough left to leap aside when a
feminine voice called "Look out!" and the arc light glinted off the
blade of a knife as it passed perilously close to his ribs. Then the
figure in white brought something down on Michel's head and, wheeling,
seized the wrist of the third man in a grip of iron.

Ten seconds later the entire trio was helpless and Carroll was blowing a
police whistle for assistance.

"There was really nothing to it at all," protested the telephone girl,
during the ride in the patrol. "They made the mistake of trying to let
Felix, with his wounded hand, take care of me. I didn't have two years
of gym work and a complete course in jiu jitsu for nothing, and that
blackjack came in mighty handy a moment or two later. All Felix
succeeded in doing was to knock my hat off, and I shed my coat the
instant I had attended to him."

"That's why I thought you were a goddess in white," murmured Dave.

"No goddess at all, just a girl from the switchboard who was glad to
have a chance at the brutes. Anyhow, that few minutes beats any book I
ever read for action!"

Dave's hand stole out in the darkness as they jolted forward, and when
it found what it was seeking, "Girl," he said, "do you realize that I
don't even know your name?"

"Lang," said a voice in the dark. "My friends call me Virginia."

"After what you just did for me, I think we ought to be at least good
friends," laughed Carroll, and the thrill of the fight which has just
passed was as nothing when she answered:

"At least that ... Dave!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Quinn paused for a moment to repack his pipe and I took advantage of the
interruption to ask what happened at the Wimbledon dinner the following
night.

"Not a thing in the world," replied Quinn. "Everything went off like
clockwork--everything but the bomb. As the Podunk _Gazette_ would say,
'A very pleasant time was had by all.' But you may be sure that they
were careful to examine the cake and the other dishes before they were
sampled by the guests. Michel, Felix, and the cook were treated to a
good dose of the third degree at headquarters, but without results. They
wouldn't even admit that they knew any such person as 'Number
Eight-fifty-nine' or von Ewald. Two of them got off with light sentences
for assault and battery. The pastry cook, however, went to the pen when
they found a quantity of high explosives in his room."

"And Miss Lang?"

"If you care to look up the marriage licenses for October, nineteen
sixteen, you'll find that one was issued in the names of David Carroll
and Virginia Lang. She's the wife of a captain now, for Dave left the
Service the following year and went to France to finish his fight with
the Hun. I saw him not long ago and the only thing that's worrying him
is where he is going to find his quota of excitement, for he says that
there is nothing left in the Service but chasing counterfeiters and
guarding the resident, and he can't stand the idea of staying in the
army and drawing his pay for wearing a uniform."




XI

"LOST--$100,000!"


"I stopped on my way here to-night and laid in a supply of something
that I don't often use--chewing gum," said Bill Quinn, formerly of the
Secret Service, as he settled back comfortably to enjoy an evening's
chat. "There are some professional reformers who maintain that the great
American habit of silently working the jaws over a wad of chewing gum is
harmful in the extreme, but if you'll look into the matter you'll find
that agitators of that type want you to cut out all habits except those
which they are addicted to.

"Personally, I'm not a habitual worshiper at the shrine of the great god
Goom, but there's no use denying the fact that it does soothe one's
nerves occasionally. Incidentally, it has other uses--as Elmer Allison
discovered not very long ago."

"Yes?" I inquired, sensing the fact that Quinn had a story up his sleeve
and was only awaiting the opportunity to spring it. "Didn't you mention
a post-office case in which a wad of gum played a prominent role?"

"That's the one," said the former government operative, easing his
wounded leg into a less cramped position. "Here, have a couple of sticks
just to get the proper atmosphere and I'll see if I can recall the
details."

       *       *       *       *       *

For some reason that's hard to define [Quinn went on, after he had
peeled two of the dun-colored sticks and commenced work on them] crooks
in general and amateur crooks in particular seem to regard the United
States mails as particularly easy prey. Possibly they figure that, as
millions of dollars are handled by the Post-office Department every
year, a little here and there won't be missed. But if they knew the high
percentage of mail robberies that are solved they wouldn't be so keen to
tackle the game.

Lifting valuables, once they have passed into the hands of Uncle Sam's
postman, is a comparatively easy crime to commit. There are dozens of
ways of doing it--methods which range all the way from fishing letters
out of a post-box with a piece of string and a hairpin, to holding up
the mail car in a deserted portion of a railroad track. But getting away
with it is, as our Yiddish friends say, something else again.

The annals of the Postal Inspection Service are filled with incidents
which indicate that the High Cost of Living is down around zero compared
to the High Cost of Crime, when said crime is aimed at the mails. There
are scores of men in Atlanta, Leavenworth, and other Federal prisons
whose advice would be to try murder, forgery, or arson rather than
attempt to earn a dishonest living by stealing valuable letters.

The majority of persons realize that it pays to register their money and
insure their packages because, once this precaution has been attended
to, the government exercises special care in the handling of these and
makes it extremely difficult for crooks to get anywhere near them. If a
registered letter disappears there is a clean-cut trail of signed
receipts to follow and somebody has to bear the burden of the loss. But
even with these precautions, the Registered Section is looted every now
and then.

One of the biggest cases of this kind on record was that which occurred
in Columbus when letters with an aggregate value of one hundred thousand
dollars just vanished into thin air. Of course, they didn't all
disappear at one time, but that made it all the more mysterious--because
the thefts were spread out over a period of some five or six weeks and
they went on, just as regularly as clockwork, in spite of the
precautions to the contrary.

The first of the losses, as I recall it, was a shipment of ten thousand
dollars in large bills sent by a Chicago bank to a financial concern in
Columbus. When working on that single case, of course, the officials of
the department were more or less in the dark as to the precise place
that the disappearance had taken place, in spite of the fact that there
were the usual signed slips indicating that the package had been
received at the Columbus Post Office. But clerks who are in a hurry
sometimes sign receipts without being any too careful to check up the
letters or packages to which they refer--a highly reprehensible
practice, but one which is the outgrowth of the shortage of help. It was
quite within the bounds of possibility, for example, for the package to
have been abstracted from the Chicago office without the loss being
discovered until Columbus checked up on the mail which was due there.

But a week or ten days later came the second of the mysterious
disappearances--another envelope containing bills of large denomination,
this time en route from Pittsburgh to Columbus. When a third loss
occurred the following fortnight, the headquarters of the Postal
Inspection Service in Washington became distinctly excited and every man
who could be spared was turned loose in an effort to solve the problem.
Orders were given to shadow all the employees who had access to the
registered mail with a view to discovering whether they had made any
change in their personal habits, whether they had displayed an unusual
amount of money within the past month, or whether their family had shown
signs of exceptional prosperity.

It was while the chief was waiting for these reports that Elmer Allison
blew into Washington unexpectedly and strolled into the room in the big
gray-stone tower of what was then the Post-office Department Building,
with the news that he had solved the "poison-pen case" in Kansas City
and was ready to tackle something else.

The chief, to put it mildly, was surprised and inquired why in the name
of the seven hinges of Hades Allison hadn't made his report directly to
the office by mail.

"That was a pretty important case, Chief," Elmer replied, "and I didn't
want to take any chances of the findings being lost in the registered
mail." Then, grinning, he continued, "Understand you've been having a
bit of trouble out in Columbus?"

"Who told you about that?" growled the chief.

"Oh, you can't keep things like that under your hat even if you do
succeed in keeping them out of the papers," retorted Allison. "A little
bird tipped me off to it three weeks ago and--"

"And you determined to leap back here as soon as you could so that you
would be assigned to the case, eh?"

"You guessed it, Chief. I wanted a try at the Columbus affair and I was
afraid I wouldn't get it unless I put the matter personally up to you.
How 'bout it?"

"As it happens, you lost about two days of valuable time in coming here,
instead of wiring for further instructions from Kansas City," the chief
told him. "I had intended taking you off that anonymous letter case by
noon to-morrow, whether you'd finished it or not, for this is a far more
important detail. Somebody's gotten away with fifty thousand dollars so
far, and there's no--"

"Pardon me, sir, but here's a wire which has just arrived from Rogers,
in Columbus. Thought you'd like to see it at once," and the chief's
secretary laid a yellow slip face upward on his desk. Allison, who was
watching closely, saw a demonstration of the reason why official
Washington maintained that the chief of the Postal Inspection Service
had the best "poker face" in the capital. Not a muscle in his
countenance changed as he read the telegram and then glanced up at
Allison, continuing his sentence precisely where he had been
interrupted:

"Reason to suppose that the thief is going to stop there. This wire from
Rogers, the postmaster at Columbus, announces the loss of a fourth
package of bills. Fifty thousand this time. That's the biggest yet and
it brings the total deficit up to one hundred thousand dollars. Rogers
says that the banks are demanding instant action and threatening to take
the case to headquarters, which means that it'll spread all over the
papers. Congress will start an investigation, some of us will lose our
official heads, and, in the mix-up, the man who's responsible for the
losses will probably make a clean getaway."

Then, with a glance at the clock which faced his desk, "There's a train
for Columbus in twenty minutes, Allison. Can you make it?"

"It's less than ten minutes to the station," replied the operative.
"That gives me plenty of leeway."

"Well, move and move fast," snapped the chief. "I'll wire Columbus that
you've been given complete charge of the case; but try to keep it away
from the papers as long as you can. The department has come in for
enough criticism lately without complicating the issue from the
outside. Good luck." And Allison was out of the door almost before he
had finished speaking.

Allison reached Columbus that night, but purposely delayed reporting for
work until the following morning. In the first place there was no
telling how long the case would run and he felt that it was the part of
wisdom to get all the rest he could in order to start fresh. The
"poison-pen" puzzle hadn't been exactly easy to solve, and his visit to
Washington, though brief, had been sufficiently long for him to absorb
some of the nervous excitement which permeated the department. Then,
too, he figured that Postmaster Rogers would be worn out by another day
of worry and that both of them would be the better for a night's
undisturbed sleep.

Nine o'clock the next morning, however, saw him seated in one of the
comfortable chairs which adorned the postmaster's private office.
Rogers, who did not put in an appearance until ten, showed plainly the
results of the strain under which he was laboring, for he was a
political appointee who had been in office only a comparatively short
time, a man whose temperament resented the attacks launched by the
opposition and who felt that publication of the facts connected with the
lost one hundred thousand dollars would spell ruin, both to his own
hopes and those of the local organization.

Allison found that the chief had wired an announcement of his coming the
day before and that Rogers was almost pitifully relieved to know that
the case was in the hands of the man who had solved nearly a score of
the problems which had arisen in the Service during the past few years.

"How much do you know about the case?" inquired the postmaster.

"Only what I learned indirectly and from what the chief told me," was
Allison's reply. "I understand that approximately one hundred thousand
dollars is missing from this post office" (here Rogers instinctively
winced as he thought of the criticism which this announcement would
cause if it were made outside the office), "but I haven't any of the
details."

"Neither have we, unfortunately," was the answer. "If we had had a few
more we might have been able to prevent the last theft. You know about
that, of course."

"The fifty thousand dollars? Yes. The chief told me that you had wired."

"Well, that incident is typical of the other three. Banks in various
parts of the country have been sending rather large sums of money
through the mails to their correspondents here. There's nothing unusual
in that at this time of the year. But within the past five or six weeks
there have been four packages--or, rather, large envelopes--of money
which have failed to be accounted for. They ranged all the way from ten
thousand dollars, the first loss, to the fifty thousand dollars which
disappeared within the past few days. I purposely delayed wiring
Washington until we could make a thorough search of the whole place,
going over the registry room with a fine-tooth comb--"

"Thus warning every man in it that he was under suspicion," muttered
Allison.

"What was that?" Rogers inquired.

"Nothing--nothing at all. Just talking to myself. Far from a good habit,
but don't mind it. I've got some queer ones. You didn't find anything,
of course?"

"In the building? No, not a thing. But I thought it best to make a
thorough clean-up here before I bothered Washington with a report."

"What about the men who've been working on the case up to this time?"

"Not one of them has been able to turn up anything that could be
dignified by the term clue, as I believe you detectives call it."

"Yes, that's the right word," agreed the operative. "At least all
members of the Detective-Story-Writers' Union employ it frequently
enough to make it fit the case. What lines have Boyd and the other men
here been following?"

"At my suggestion they made a careful examination into the private lives
of all employees of the post-office, including myself," Rogers answered,
a bit pompously. "I did not intend to evade the slightest responsibility
in the matter, so I turned over my bankbook, the key to my safe-deposit
vault and even allowed them to search my house from cellar to garret."

"Was this procedure followed with respect to all the other employees in
the building?"

"No, only one or two of the highest--personal friends of mine whom I
could trust to keep silent. I didn't care to swear out search warrants
for the residences of all the people who work here, and that's what it
would have meant if they had raised any objection. In their cases the
investigation was confined to inquiries concerning their expenditures in
the neighborhood, unexpected prosperity, and the like."

"With what result?"

"None at all. From all appearances there isn't a soul in this building
who has had ten cents more during the past six weeks than he possessed
in any like period for two years back."

"Did Boyd or any of the other department operatives ask to see the plans
of the post office?" inquired Allison, taking another tack.

"The what?"

"The plans of the post-office--the blue print prepared at the time that
the building was erected."

"No. Why should they?"

"I thought they might have been interested in it, that's all," was
Allison's answer, but anyone who knew him would have noted that his tone
was just a trifle too nonchalant to be entirely truthful.

"By the way," added the operative, "might I see it?"

"The blue print?"

"Yes. You will probably find it in the safe. If you'll have some one
look it up, I'll be back in half an hour to examine it," said Allison.
"Meanwhile, I'll talk to Boyd and the other men already on the ground
and see if I can dig anything out of what they've discovered."

But Boyd and his associates were just as relieved as Rogers had been to
find that the case had been placed in Allison's hands. Four weeks and
more of steady work had left them precisely where they had
commenced--"several miles back of that point," as one of them admitted,
"for three more stunts have been pulled off right under our eyes." The
personal as well as the official record of every man and woman in the
Columbus post office had been gone over with a microscope, without the
slightest result. If the germ of dishonesty was present, it was
certainly well hidden.

"We'll try another and more powerful lens," Allison stated, as he turned
back to the postmaster's private office. "By the way, Boyd, have you or
any of your men been in the Service more than four years?"

"No, I don't think any of us has. What has that got to do with it?"

"Not a thing in the world, as far as your ability is concerned, but
there is one point that every one of you overlooked--because you never
heard of it. I'm going to try it out myself now and I'll let you know
what develops."

With that Allison turned and sauntered back into Rogers's office.

There, spread upon the desk, was the missing blue print, creased and
dusty from disuse.

"First time you ever saw this, eh?" Allison inquired of the postmaster.

"The first time I even knew it was there," admitted that official.
"How'd you know where to find it?"

"I didn't--but there's an ironclad rule of the department that plans of
this nature are to be kept under lock and key for just such emergencies
as this. But I guess your predecessor was too busy to worry you with
details."

Rogers grunted. It was an open secret that the postmaster who had
preceded him had not been any too friendly to his successor.

Allison did not pursue the subject but spread the plan upon an
unoccupied table so that he could examine it with care.

"If you'll be good enough to lock that door, Postmaster," he directed,
"I'll show you something else about your building that you didn't know.
But I don't want anybody else coming in while we're discussing it."

Puzzled, but feeling that the government detective ought to be allowed
to handle things in his own way, Rogers turned the key in the lock and
came over to the table where Allison stood.

"Do you see that little square marked with a white star and the letter
'L'?" asked Elmer.

"Yes, what is it?"

"What is this large room next to it?" countered the operative.

"That's the--why, that's the registry room!"

"Precisely. And concealed in the wall in a spot known only to persons
familiar with this blue print, is a tiny closet, or 'lookout.' That's
what the 'L' means and that's the reason that there's a strict rule
about guarding plans of this nature very carefully."

"You mean to say that a place has been provided for supervision of the
registry division--a room from which the clerks can be watched without
their knowledge?"

"Exactly--and such a precaution has been taken in practically every post
office of any size in the country. Only the older men in the Service
know about it, which is the reason that neither Boyd nor any of his men
asked to see this set of plans. The next step is to find the key to the
lookout and start in on a very monotonous spell of watchful waiting. You
have the bunch of master keys, of course?"

"Yes, they're in the safe where the plans were kept. Just a moment and
I'll get them."

When Rogers produced the collection of keys, Allison ran hurriedly over
them and selected one which bore, on the handle, a small six-pointed
star corresponding to the mark on the blue print.

"Want to go up with me and investigate the secret chamber?" he inquired.

"I certainly do," agreed Rogers. "But there's one point where this room
won't help us in the slightest. How did the thief get the mail
containing the money out of the building? You know the system that
maintains in the registry room? It's practically impossible for a sheet
of paper to be taken out of there, particularly when we are on guard, as
we are now."

"That's true," Allison admitted, "but it's been my experience that
problems which appear the most puzzling are, after all, the simplest of
explanation. You remember the Philadelphia mint robbery--the one that
Drummond solved in less than six hours? This may prove to be just as
easy."

There Allison was wrong, dead wrong--as he had to admit some ten days
later, when, worn with the strain of sitting for hours at a time with
his eyes glued to the ventilator which masked the opening to the
lookout, he finally came to the conclusion that something would have to
be done to speed things up. It was true that no new robberies had
occurred in the meantime, but neither had any of the old ones been
punished. The lost one hundred thousand dollars was still lost; though
the department, with the aid of the Treasury officials, had seen that
the banks were reimbursed.

"The decoy letter," thought Allison, "is probably the oldest dodge in
the world. But, who knows, it may work again in this case--provided we
stage-manage it sufficiently carefully."

With the assistance of the cashier of one of the local banks Elmer
arranged to have a dummy package of money forwarded by mail from New
York. It was supposed to contain thirty-five thousand dollars in cash,
and all the formalities were complied with precisely as if thirty-five
thousand-dollar bills were really inside the envelope, instead of as
many sheets of blank paper carefully arranged.

On the morning of the day the envelope was due to reach Columbus,
Allison took up his position close to the grille in the lookout, his
eyes strained to catch the slightest suspicious movement below. Hour
after hour passed uneventfully until, almost immediately below him, he
saw a man drop something on the floor. Two envelopes had slipped from
his hands and he stooped to pick them up--that was all.

But what carried a thrill to the operative in the lookout was the fact
that one of the envelopes was the dummy sent from New York and that,
when the man straightened up, he had only _one_ of the two in his hands.
The dummy had disappeared!

Allison rubbed his eyes and looked again. No, he was right. The postal
clerk had, in some manner, disposed of the envelope supposed to contain
thirty-five thousand dollars and he was going about his work in
precisely the same way as before.

"Wait a minute," Allison argued to himself. "There's something missing
besides the envelope! What is it?"

A moment later he had the clue to the whole affair--the jaws of the
clerk, which Allison had previously and subconsciously noted were always
hard at work on a wad of gum, now were at rest for the first time since
the operative had entered the lookout! The chewing gum and the dummy
packet had disappeared at the same time!

It didn't take Elmer more than thirty seconds to reach Rogers's office,
and he entered with the startling announcement that "an envelope
containing thirty-five thousand dollars had just disappeared from the
registry room."

"What?" demanded the postmaster. "How do you know? I haven't received
any report of it."

"No, and you probably wouldn't for some time," Elmer retorted. "But it
happens that I saw it disappear."

"Then you know where it is?"

"I can lay my hands on it--and probably the rest of the missing
money--inside of one minute. Let's pay a visit to the registry room."

Before entering the section, however, Allison took the precaution of
posting men at both of the doors.

"After I'm inside," he directed, "don't allow anyone to leave on any
pretext whatever. And stand ready for trouble in case it develops. Come
on, Mr. Rogers."

Once in the room devoted to the handling of registered mail, Allison
made directly for the desk under the lookout. The occupant regarded
their approach with interest but, apparently, without a trace of
anxiety.

"I'd like to have that letter supposed to contain thirty-five thousand
dollars which you dropped on the floor a few moments ago," Elmer
remarked in a quiet, almost conversational tone.

Except for a sudden start, the clerk appeared the picture of innocence.

"What letter?" he parried.

"You know what one!" snapped Allison, dropping his suave manner and
moving his hand significantly toward his coat pocket. "Will you produce
it--or shall I?"

"I--I don't know what you are talking about," stammered the clerk.

"No? Well, I'll show you!" and the operative's hands flashed forward and
there was a slight click as a pair of handcuffs snapped into place.
"Now, Mr. Rogers, you'll be good enough to watch me carefully, as your
evidence will probably be needed in court. I'll show you as simple and
clever a scheme as I've ever run across."

With that Allison dropped to the floor, wormed his way under the
table-desk, tugged at something for a moment and then rose, holding five
large envelopes in his hands!

"There's your lost one hundred thousand dollars," he explained, "and a
dummy packet of thirty-five thousand dollars to boot. Thought you could
get away with it indefinitely, eh?" he inquired of the handcuffed clerk.
"If you'd stopped with the one hundred thousand dollars, as you'd
probably intended to do, you might have. But that extra letter turned
the trick. Too bad it contained only blank paper"--and he ripped the
envelope open to prove his assertion.

"But--but--I don't understand," faltered Rogers. "How did this man work
it right under our eyes?"

"He didn't," declared Allison. "He tried to work it right under mine,
but he couldn't get away with it. The plan was simplicity itself. He'd
slip an envelope which he knew contained a large sum of money out of the
pile as it passed him--he hadn't signed for them, so he wasn't taking
any special risk--drop it on the floor, stoop over, and, if he wasn't
being watched, attach it to the _bottom_ of his desk with a wad of
chewing gum. You boasted that you went over the room with a fine-tooth
comb, but who would think of looking on the under side of this table.
The idea, of course, was that he'd wait for the storm to blow
over--because the letters could remain in their hiding places for
months, if necessary--and then start on a lifelong vacation with his
spoils as capital. But he made the error of overcapitalization and I
very much fear that he'll put in at least ten years at Leavenworth or
Morgantown. But I'd like to bet he never chews another piece of gum!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That," continued Quinn, as he tossed another pink wrapper into the
wastebasket, "I consider the simplest and cleverest scheme to beat the
government that I ever heard of--better even than Cochrane's plan in
connection with the robbery of the Philadelphia mint, because it didn't
necessitate any outside preparation at all. The right job, a piece of
gum, and there you are. But you may be sure that whenever an important
letter disappears nowadays, one of the first places searched by the
Postal Inspection operatives is the lower side of the desks and tables.
You can't get away with a trick twice in the same place."




XII

"THE DOUBLE CODE"


It was one night in early fall that Bill Quinn and I were browsing
around the library in the house that he had called "home" ever since a
counterfeiter's bullet incapacitated him from further active work in the
Secret Service. Prior to that time he had lived, as he put it, "wherever
he hung his hat," but now there was a comfortable little house with a
den where Quinn kept the more unusual, and often gruesome, relics which
brought back memories of the past.

There, hanging on the wall with a dark-brown stain still adorning the
razorlike edge, was a Chinese hatchet which had doubtless figured in
some tong war on the Coast. Below was an ordinary twenty-five-cent
piece, attached to the wall paper with chewing gum--"just as it once
aided in robbing the Treasury of nearly a million dollars," Quinn
assured me. In another part of the room was a frame containing what
appeared to be a bit torn from the wrapping of a package, with the
canceled stamp and a half-obliterated postmark as the only clues to the
murder of the man who had received it, and, beside the bookcases, which
contained a wide range of detective literature, hung a larger frame in
which were the finger prints of more than a score of criminals, men
bearing names practically unknown to the public, but whose exploits were
bywords in the various governmental detective services.

It was while glancing over the contents of the bookcase that I noted one
volume which appeared strangely out of place in this collection of the
fictional romances of crime.

"What's this doing here?" I inquired, taking down a volume of _The Giant
Raft_, by Jules Verne. "Verne didn't write detective stories, did he?"

"No," replied Quinn, "and it's really out of place in the bookcase. If
possible, I'd like to have it framed and put on the wall with the rest
of the relics--for it's really more important than any of them, from the
standpoint of value to the nation. That quarter on the wall over
there--the one which figured in the Sugar Fraud case--cost the
government in the neighborhood of a million dollars, but this book
probably saved a score of millions and hundreds of lives as well. If it
hadn't been for the fact that Thurber of the Navy Department knew his
Jules Vernes even better than he did his Bible, it's quite possible
that--

"Well, there's no use telling the end of the story before the beginning.
Make yourself comfortable and I'll see if I can recall the details of
the case."

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember Dr. Heinrich Albert? [Quinn inquired, after we had both
stretched out in front of the open fire]. Theoretically, the Herr Doktor
was attached to the German embassy in Washington merely in an advisory
and financial capacity. He and Haniel von Heimhausen--the same counselor
that the present German government wanted to send over here as
ambassador after the signing of the peace treaty--were charged with the
solution of many of the legal difficulties which arose in connection
with the business of the big red brick dwelling on Massachusetts Avenue.
But while von Heimhausen was occupied with the legal end of the game,
Doctor Albert attended to many of the underground details which went
unsuspected for many years.

It was he, for example, who managed the bidding for the wireless station
in the Philippines--the plan which permitted the German government to
dictate the location of the station and to see to it that the towers
were so placed where they would be most useful to Berlin. He undoubtedly
worked with von Papen and Boy-Ed during the early years of the
war--years in which this precious trio, either with or without the
knowledge of Count von Bernstorff, sought by every means to cripple
American shipping, violate American neutrality, and make a laughingstock
of American diplomatic methods. What's more, they got away with it for
months, not because the Secret Service and the Department of Justice
weren't hot on their trail, but because the Germans were too cagy to be
caught and you can't arrest a diplomat just on suspicion.

During the months which followed the first of August, nineteen fourteen,
practically every one of the government's detective services was called
upon in some way to pry into the affairs of the embassy staff. But the
brunt of the work naturally devolved upon the two organizations directly
concerned with preventing flagrant breaches of neutrality--the Secret
Service and the Department of Justice.

Every time that Doctor Albert, or any other official of the German
government, left Washington he was trailed by anywhere from one to five
men. Every move he made was noted and reported to headquarters, with the
result that the State Department had a very good idea of the names of
the men who were being used to forward Germany's ends, even though it
knew comparatively little about what was actually planned. The attachés
were entirely too clever to carry on compromising conversations in the
open, and their appointments were made in such a manner as effectually
to prevent the planting of a dictaphone or any other device by which
they might be overheard.

The directions to the men who were responsible for the working of the
two Services were:

     Every attaché of the German embassy is to be guarded with
     extreme care, day and night. Reports are to be made through
     the usual channels and, in the event that something unusual
     is observed, Divisional Headquarters is to be notified
     instantly, the information being transmitted to Washington
     before any final action is taken.

This last clause, of course, was inserted to prevent some hot-headed
operative from going off half-cocked and thus spoiling the State
Department's plans. As long as Albert and his associates were merely
"guarded" they couldn't enter any formal complaint. But, given half a
chance, they would have gotten on their official dignity and demanded
that the espionage cease.

From the State Department's point of view it was an excellent rule, but
Gene Barlow and the other Service men assigned to follow Albert couldn't
see it in that light.

"What's the idea, anyhow?" Gene growled one night as his pet taxicab
dashed down Massachusetts Avenue in the wake of the big touring car that
was carrying the German attaché to the Union Station. "Here we have to
be on the job at all hours, just to watch this Dutchman and see what he
does. And," with a note of contempt, "he never does anything worth
reporting. Sees half a dozen people, lunches at the German-American
Club, drops in at two or three offices downtown, and then back here
again. If they'd only let us waylay him and get hold of that black bag
that he always carts around there'd be nothing to it. Some day I'm
going to do that little thing, just to see what happens."

But Barlow took it out in threats. Secret Service men find pleasure in
stating what they are going to do "some day"--but the quality of
implicit obedience has been drilled into them too thoroughly for them to
forget it, which is possibly the reason why they take such a sheer and
genuine delight in going ahead when the restrictions are finally lifted.

It was in New York, more than two years after the war had commenced,
that Barlow got his first opportunity to "see what would happen." In the
meantime, he had been assigned to half a dozen other cases, but always
returned to the shadowing of Doctor Albert because he was the one man
who had been eminently successful in that work. The German had an almost
uncanny habit of throwing his pursuers off the trail whenever he wanted
to and in spite of the efforts of the cleverest men in the Service had
disappeared from time to time. The resumption of unrestricted submarine
warfare and the delicacy of the diplomatic situation which ensued made
it imperative that the "man with the saber scar," as Doctor Albert was
known, be kept constantly under surveillance.

"Stick to him, Gene, and don't bother about reporting until you are
certain that he will stay put long enough for you to phone," were the
instructions that Barlow received. "The doctor must be watched every
moment that he's away from the Embassy and it's up to you to do it."

"Anything else beside watching him?" inquired the operative, hopefully.

"No," smiled the chief, "there isn't to be any rough stuff. We're on the
verge of an explosion as it is, and anyone who pulls the hair trigger
will not only find himself out of a job, but will have the doubtful
satisfaction of knowing that he's responsible for wrecking some very
carefully laid plans. Where Albert goes, who he talks with and, if
possible, a few details of what they discuss, is all that's wanted."

"Wouldn't like to have a piece of the Kaiser's mustache or anything of
that kind, would you, Chief?" Barlow retorted. "I could get that for you
a whole lot easier than I could find out what the man with the saber
scar talks about. He's the original George B. Careful. Never was known
to take a chance. Wouldn't bet a nickel against a hundred dollars that
the sun would come up to-morrow and always sees to it that his
conferences are held behind bolted doors. They even pull down the shades
so that no lip reader with a pair of field glasses can get a tip as to
what they're talking about."

"That's the reason you were picked for this case," was the chief's
reply. "Any strong-arm man could whale Albert over the head and throw
him in the river. That wouldn't help any. What we need is information
concerning what his plans are, and it takes a clever man to get that."

"All bull and a yard wide!" laughed Gene, but the compliment pleased
him, nevertheless. "I'll watch him, but let me know when the lid comes
off and I can use other methods."

The chief promised that he would--and it was not more than three weeks
later that he had an opportunity to make good.

"Barlow," he directed, speaking over the long-distance phone to the
operative in New York, "the Department of Justice has just reported that
Doctor Albert is in receipt of a document of some kind--probably a
letter of instruction from Berlin--which it is vital that we have at
once. Our information is that the message is written on a slip of oiled
paper carried inside a dummy lead pencil. It's possible that the doctor
has destroyed it, but it isn't probable. Can you get it?"

"How far am I allowed to go?" inquired Gene, hoping for permission to
stage a kidnaping of the German attaché, but fully expecting these
instructions which followed--orders that he was to do nothing that would
cause an open breach, nothing for which Doctor Albert could demand
reparation or even an apology.

"In other words," Barlow said to himself, as he hung up the phone, "I'm
to accomplish the impossible, blindfolded and with my hands tied. Wonder
whether Paula would have a hunch--"

Paula was Barlow's sweetheart, a pretty little brunette who earned a
very good salary as private secretary to one of the leading lights of
Wall Street--which accounted for the fact that the operative had learned
to rely upon her quick flashes of intuitive judgment for help in a
number of situations which had required tact as well as action. They
were to be married whenever Gene's professional activities subsided
sufficiently to allow him to remain home at least one night a month,
but, meanwhile, Paula maintained that she would as soon be the wife of
an African explorer--"Because at least I would know that he wouldn't be
back for six months, while I haven't any idea whether you'll be out of
town two days or two years."

After they had talked the Albert matter over from all angles, Paula
inquired, "Where would your friend with the saber scar be likely to
carry the paper?"

"Either in his pocket or in the black bag that he invariably has with
him."

"Hum!" she mused, "if it's in his pocket I don't see that there is
anything you can do, short of knocking him down and taking it away from
him, and that's barred by the rules of the game. But if it is in the
mysterious black bag.... Is the doctor in town now?"

"Yes, he's at the Astor, probably for two or three days. I left Dwyer
and French on guard there while I, presumably, snatched a little sleep.
But I'd rather have your advice than any amount of rest."

"Thanks," was the girl's only comment, for her mind was busy with the
problem. "There's apparently no time to lose, so I'll inform the office
the first thing in the morning that I won't be down, meet you in front
of the Astor, and we'll see what happens. Just let me stick with you,
inconspicuously, and I think that I can guarantee at least an
opportunity to lift the bag without giving the German a chance to raise
a row."

Thus it was that, early the next day, Gene Barlow was joined by a
distinctly personable young woman who, after a moment's conversation,
strolled up and down Broadway in front of the hotel.

Some twenty minutes later a man whose face had been disfigured by a
saber slash received at Heidelberg came down the steps and asked for a
taxi. But Barlow, acting under directions from Paula, had seen that
there were no taxis to be had. A flash of his badge and some coin of the
realm had fixed that. So Dr. Heinrich Albert, of the German embassy, was
forced to take a plebeian surface car--as Paula had intended that he
should. The Secret Service operative and his pretty companion boarded
the same car a block farther down, two other government agents having
held it sufficiently long at Forty-fourth Street to permit of this move.

Worming their way through the crowd when their prey changed to the Sixth
Avenue Elevated, Gene and Paula soon reached points of vantage on either
side of the German, who carried his black bag tightly grasped in his
right hand, and the trio kept this formation until they reached Fiftieth
Street, when the girl apparently started to make her way toward the
door. Something caused her to stumble, however, and she pitched forward
right into the arms of the German, who by that time had secured a seat
and had placed his bag beside him, still guarding it with a protecting
arm.

Before the foreigner had time to gather his wits, he found himself with
a pretty girl literally in his lap--a girl who was manifestly a lady and
who blushed to the tips of her ears as she apologized for her
awkwardness. Even if the German had been a woman-hater there would have
been nothing for him to do but to assist her to her feet, and that,
necessarily, required the use of both hands. As it happened, Doctor
Albert was distinctly susceptible to feminine charms, and there was
something about this girl's smile which was friendly, though
embarrassed.

So he spent longer than was strictly essential in helping her to the
door--she appeared to have turned her ankle--and then returned to his
seat only to find that his portfolio was missing!

Recriminations and threats were useless. A score of people had left the
car and, as the guard heartlessly refused to stop the train before the
next station, there was naturally not a trace of the girl or the man who
had accompanied her. By that time, in fact, Barlow and Paula had slipped
into the shelter of a neighboring hotel lobby and were busy inspecting
the contents of Doctor Albert's precious brief case.

"Even if there's nothing in it," laughed the girl, "we've had the
satisfaction of scaring him to death."

Gene said nothing, but pawed through the papers in frantic haste.

"A slip of oiled paper," he muttered. "By the Lord Harry! here it is!"
and he produced a pencil which his trained fingers told him was lighter
than it should be. With a wrench he broke off the metal tip that held
the eraser, and from within the wooden spindle removed a tightly wrapped
roll of very thin, almost transparent paper, covered with unintelligible
lettering.

"What's on it?" demanded Paula.

"I'll never tell you," was Barlow's reply. "It would take a better man
than I am to decipher this," and he read off:

     "I i i t f b b t t x o...."

"Code?" interrupted the girl.

"Sure it is--and apparently a peach." The next moment he had slipped the
paper carefully into an inside pocket, crammed the rest of the papers
back into the brief case, and was disappearing into a phone booth.

"Better get down to work, dear," he called over his shoulder. "I'm going
to report to the office here and then take this stuff down to
Washington!" And that was the last that Paula saw of him for a week.

Six hours later Barlow entered the chief's office in the Treasury
Department and reported that he had secured the code message.

"So New York phoned," was the only comment from the man who directed the
destinies of the Secret Service. "Take it right up to the Navy
Department and turn it over to Thurber, the librarian. He'll be able to
read it, if anybody can."

Thurber, Gene knew, was the man who was recognizedly the leading
authority on military codes and ciphers in the United States, the man
who had made a hobby as well as a business of decoding mysterious
messages and who had finally deciphered the famous "square letter" code,
though it took him months to do it.

"He'll have to work faster than that this time," thought Barlow, as he
made his way toward the librarian's office on the fourth floor of the
big gray-stone building. "Time's at a premium and Germany moves too fast
to waste any of it."

But Thurber was fully cognizant of the necessity for quick action. He
had been warned that Barlow was bringing the dispatch and the entire
office was cleared for work.

Spreading the oiled paper on a table top made of clear glass, the
Librarian turned on a battery of strong electric lights underneath so
that any watermark or secret writing would have been at once apparent.
But there was nothing on the sheet except line after line of meaningless
letters.

"It's possible, of course, that there may be some writing in invisible
ink on the sheet," admitted the cipher expert. "But the fact that oiled
paper is used would seem to preclude that. The code itself may be any
one of several varieties and it's a matter of trying 'em all until you
hit upon the right one."

"I thought that Poe's story of 'The Gold Bug' claimed that any cipher
could be read if you selected the letter that appeared most frequently
and substituted for it the letter 'e,' which is used most often in
English, and so on down the list," stated Barlow.

"So it did. But there are lots of things that Poe didn't know about
codes." Thurber retorted, his eyes riveted to the sheet before him.
"Besides, that was fiction and the author knew just how the code was
constructed, while this is fact and we have to depend upon hard work and
blind luck.

"There are any number of arbitrary systems which might have been used in
writing this message," he continued. "The army clock code is one of
them--the one in which a number is added to every letter figure,
dependent upon the hour at which the message is written. But I don't
think that applies in this case. The cipher doesn't look like it--though
I'll have to admit that it doesn't look like any that I've come across
before. Let's put it on the blackboard and study it from across the
room. That often helps in concentrating."

"You're not going to write the whole thing on the board?" queried the
operative.

"No, only the first fifteen letters or so," and Thurber put down this
line:

     I i i t f b b t t x o r q w s b b

"Translated into what we call 'letter figures,'" he went on, "that would
be 9 9 9 20 6 2 2 20 20 24 15 18 17 23 19 2 2--the system where 'a' is
denoted by 1, 'b' by 2, and so on. No, that's still meaningless. That
repetition of the letter 'i' at the beginning of the message is what
makes it particularly puzzling.

"If you don't mind, I'll lock the door and get to work on this in
earnest. Where can I reach you by phone?"

Barlow smiled at this polite dismissal and, stating that he would be at
headquarters for the rest of the evening and that they would know where
to reach him after that, left the office--decidedly doubtful as to
Thurber's ability to read the message.

Long after midnight Gene answered a ring from the phone beside his bed
and through a haze of sleep heard the voice of the navy librarian
inquiring if he still had the other papers which had been in Doctor
Albert's bag.

"No," replied the operative, "but I can get them. They are on top of the
chief's desk. Nothing in them, though. Went over them with a
microscope."

"Just the same," directed Thurber, "I'd like to have them right away. I
think I'm on the trail, but the message is impossible to decipher unless
we get the code word. It may be in some of the other papers."

Barlow found the librarian red-eyed from his lack of sleep and the
strain of the concentration over the code letter. But when they had gone
over the papers found in the black bag, even Thurber had to admit that
he was checkmated.

"Somewhere," he maintained, "is the one word which will solve the whole
thing. I know the type of cipher. It's one that is very seldom used; in
fact, the only reference to it that I know of is in Jules Verne's novel
_The Giant Raft_. It's a question of taking a key word, using the letter
figures which denote this, and adding these to the letter figures of the
original letter. That will give you a series of numbers which it is
impossible to decipher unless you know the key word. I feel certain that
this is a variation of that system, for the fact that two letters appear
together so frequently would seem to indicate that the numbers which
they represent are higher than twenty-six, the number of the letters in
the alphabet."

"One word!" muttered Barlow. Then, seizing what was apparently a
memorandum sheet from the pile of Albert's papers, he exclaimed: "Here's
a list that neither the chief nor I could make anything of. See? It has
twelve numbers, which might be the months of the year, with a name or
word behind each one!"

"Yes," replied Thurber, disconsolately, "I saw that the first thing. But
this is October and the word corresponding to the number ten is
'Wilhelmstrasse'--and that doesn't help at all. I tried it."

"Then try 'Hohenzollern,' the September word!" snapped Barlow. "This
message was presumably written in Berlin and therefore took some time to
get over here."

"By George! that's so! A variation of the 'clock code' as well as
Verne's idea. Here, read off the letters and I'll put them on the board
with the figures representing Hohenzollern underneath. Take the first
fifteen as before."

When they had finished, the blackboard bore the following, the first
line being the original code letters, the second the letter figures of
these, and the third the figures of the word "Hohenzollern" with the
first "h" repeated for the fifteenth letter:

  I i i t f b b t t x o r q w s b b

          I  ii   t  f  bb  tt   x   o   r   q   w   s  bb
          9  35  20  6  28  46  24  15  18  17  23  19  28
          8  15   8  5  14  26  15  12  12   5  18  14   8

"Why thirty-five for that double 'i' and twenty-eight for the double
'b's'?" asked Barlow.

"Add twenty-six--the total number of letters in the alphabet--to the
letter figure for the letter itself," said Thurber. "That's the one
beauty of this code, one of the things which helps to throw you off the
scent. Now subtracting the two lines we have:

    "1   20   12   1   14   20   9   3   6   12   5   5   20

"We've got it!" he cried an instant later, as he stepped back to look at
the figures and read off:

              "A t l a n t i c   f l e e t

"It was a double code, after all," Thurber stated when he had deciphered
the entire message by the same procedure and had reported his discovery
to the Secretary of the Navy over the phone. "Practically infallible,
too, save for the fact that I, as well as Doctor Albert, happened to be
familiar with Jules Verne. That, plus the doctor's inability to rely on
his memory and therefore leaving his key words in his brief case,
rendered the whole thing pretty easy."

"Yes," thought Gene, "plus my suggestion of the September word, rather
than the October one, and plus Paula's quick wit--that's really all
there was to it!" But he kept his thoughts to himself, preferring to
allow Thurber to reap all the rewards that were coming to him for the
solution of the "double code."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Do you know what the whole message was?" I inquired, as Quinn stopped
his narrative.

"You'll find it pasted on the back of that copy of _The Giant Raft_,"
replied the former operative. "That's why I claim that the book ought to
be preserved as a souvenir of an incident that saved millions of dollars
and hundreds of lives."

Turning to the back of the Verne book I saw pasted there the following
significant lines:

     Atlantic Fleet sails (from) Hampton Roads (at) six (o'clock)
     morning of seventeenth. Eight U-boats will be waiting. Advise
     necessary parties and be ready (to) seek safety. Success (of)
     attack inevitable.

"That means that if Thurber hadn't been able to decipher that code the
greater part of our fleet would have been sunk by an unexpected
submarine attack, launched by a nation with whom we weren't even at
war?" I demanded, when I had finished the message.

"Precisely," agreed Quinn. "But if you'll look up the records you'll
find that the fleet did not sail on schedule, while Dr. Heinrich Albert
and the entire staff from the house on Massachusetts Avenue were
deported before many more weeks had passed. There was no sense in
raising a fuss about the incident at the time, for von Bernstorff would
have denied any knowledge of the message and probably would have charged
that the whole thing was a plant, designed to embroil the United States
in the war. So it was allowed to rest for the time being and merely
jotted down as another score to be wiped off the slate later on.

"But you have to admit that a knowledge of Jules Verne came in very
handy--quite as much so, in fact, as did a knowledge of the habits and
disposition of white mice in another case."

"Which one was that?"

Quinn merely pointed to the top of his bookcase, where there reposed a
stuffed white mouse, apparently asleep.

"That's a memento of the case," replied the former operative. "I'll tell
you of it the next time you drop in."




XIII

THE TRAIL OF THE WHITE MICE


"The United States Secret Service," announced Bill Quinn, "is by long
odds the best known branch of the governmental detective bureaus. The
terror which the continental crook feels at the sound of the name
'Scotland Yard' finds its echo on this side of the Atlantic whenever a
criminal knows that he has run afoul of the U. S. S. S. For Uncle Sam
never forgives an injury or forgets a wrong. Sooner or later he's going
to get his man--no matter how long it takes nor how much money it costs.

"But the Secret Service, strictly speaking, is only one branch of the
organization. There are others which work just as quietly and just as
effectively. The Department of Justice, which had charge of the
violation of neutrality laws, banking, and the like; the Treasury
Department, which, through the Customs Service and the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, wages constant war on the men and women who think they
can evade the import regulations and the laws against illicit
manufacture of alcohol; the Pension Bureau of the Interior Department,
which is called upon to handle hundreds of frauds every year; and the
Post Office Department, which guards the millions of dollars intrusted
to the mails.

"Each of these has its own province. Each works along its own line in
conjunction with the others, and each of them is, in reality, a secret
organization which performs a vastly important service to the nation as
a whole. When you speak of the Secret Service, the Treasury Department's
organization comes immediately to mind--coupled with a panorama of
counterfeiters, anarchists, revolutionaries, and the like. But the field
of the Secret Service is really limited when compared to the scope of
the other organizations.

"Look around this room"--and he made a gesture which included the four
walls of the library den in which we were seated, a room in which the
usual decorations had been replaced by a strange collection of unusual
and, in a number of instances, gruesome relics. "Every one of those
objects is a memento of some exploit of the men engaged in Secret
Service," Quinn went on. "That Chinese hatchet up there came very close
to being buried in the skull of a man in San Diego, but its principal
mission in life was the solution of the mystery surrounding the
smuggling of thousands of pounds of opium. That water-stained cap was
fished out of the Missouri after its owner had apparently committed
suicide--but the Pension Bureau located him seven years later, with the
aid of a fortune teller in Seattle. At the side of the bookcase there
you will find several of the original poison-pen letters which created
so much consternation in Kansas City a few years ago, letters which
Allison of the Postal Inspection Service finally traced to their source
after the local authorities had given up the case as impossible of
solution.

"The woman whose picture appears on the other wall was known as Mrs.
Armitage--and that was about all that they did know about her, save that
she was connected with one of the foreign organizations and that in some
mysterious way she knew everything that was going on in the State
Department almost as soon as it was started. And there, under that piece
of silk which figured in one of the boldest smuggling cases that the
Treasury Department ever tackled, is the blurred postmark which
eventually led to the discovery of the man who murdered Montgomery
Marshall--a case in which our old friend Sherlock Holmes would have
reveled. But it's doubtful if he could have solved it any more
skillfully than did one of the Post Office operatives."

"What's the significance of that white mouse on the mantelpiece?" I
inquired, sensing the fact that Quinn was in one of his story-telling
moods.

"It hasn't any significance," replied the former government agent, "but
it has a story--one which illustrates my point that all the nation's
detective work isn't handled by the Secret Service, by a long shot. Did
you ever hear of H. Gordon Fowler, alias W. C. Evans?"

"No," I replied, "I don't think I ever did."

"Well, a lot of people have--to their sorrow," laughed Quinn, reaching
for his pipe.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one appears to know what Fowler's real name is [continued the former
operative]. He traveled under a whole flock of aliases which ran the
gamut of the alphabet from Andrews to Zachary, but, to save mixing
things up, suppose that we assume that his right name was Fowler. He
used it for six months at one time, out in Minneapolis, and got away
with twenty thousand dollars' worth of stuff.

For some time previous to Fowler's entrance upon the scene various
wholesale houses throughout the country had been made the victims of
what appeared to be a ring of bankruptcy experts--men who would secure
credit for goods, open a store, and then "fail." Meanwhile the
merchandise would have mysteriously vanished and the proprietor would be
away on a "vacation" from which, of course, he would never return.

On the face of it this was a matter to be settled solely by the
Wholesalers' Credit Association, but the Postal Inspection Service got
into it through the fact that the mails were palpably being used with
intent to defraud and therefore Uncle Sam came to the aid of the
business men.

On the day that the matter was reported to Washington the chief of the
Postal Inspection Service pushed the button which operated a buzzer in
the outer office and summoned Hal Preston, the chap who later on was
responsible for the solution of the Marshall murder mystery.

"Hal," said the chief, with a smile, "here's a case I know you'll like.
It's right in the line of routine and it ought to mean a lot of
traveling around the country--quick jumps at night and all that sort of
stuff."

Preston grunted, but said nothing. You couldn't expect to draw the big
cases every time, and, besides, there was no telling when something
might break even in the most prosaic of assignments.

"Grant, Wilcox & Company, in Boston, report that they've been stung
twice in the same place by a gang of bankruptcy sharks," the chief went
on. "And they're not the only ones who have suffered. Here's a list of
the concerns and the men that they've sold to. You'll see that it covers
the country from Hoquiam, Washington, to Montclair, New Jersey--so they
appear to have their organization pretty well in hand. Ordinarily we
wouldn't figure in this thing at all--but the gang made the mistake of
placing their orders through the mail and now it's up to us to land 'em.
Here's the dope. Hop to it!"

That night, while en route to Mount Clemens, Michigan, where the latest
of the frauds had been perpetrated, Preston examined the envelope full
of evidence and came to a number of interesting conclusions. In the
first place the failures had been staged in a number of different
localities--Erie, Pennsylvania, had had one of them under the name of
"Cole & Hill"; there had been another in Sioux City, where Immerling
Brothers had failed; Metcalf and Newman, Illinois, had likewise
contributed their share, as had Minneapolis, Newark, Columbus, White
Plains, and Newburg, New York; San Diego, California; Hoquiam,
Washington, and several other points.

But the point that brought Hal up with a jerk was the dates attached to
each of these affairs. No two of them had occurred within six months of
the other and several were separated by as much as a year.

"Who said this was a gang?" he muttered. "Looks a lot more like the work
of a single man with plenty of nerve and, from the amount of stuff he
got away with, he ought to be pretty nearly in the millionaire class by
now. There's over two hundred thousand dollars' worth of goods covered
by this report alone and there's no certainty that it is complete. Well,
here's hoping--it's always easier to trail one man than a whole bunch of
'em."

In Mount Clemens Preston found further evidence which tended to prove
that the bankruptcy game was being worked by a single nervy individual,
posing under the name of "Henry Gerard."

Gerard, it appeared, had entered the local field about a year before,
apparently with plenty of capital, and had opened two prosperous stores
on the principal street. In August, about two months before Preston's
arrival, the proprietor of the Gerard stores had left on what was
apparently scheduled for a two weeks' vacation. That was the last that
had been heard of him, in spite of the fact that a number of urgent
creditors had camped upon his trail very solicitously. The stores had
been looted, only enough merchandise being left to keep up the fiction
of a complete stock, and Gerard had vanished with the proceeds.

After making a few guarded inquiries in the neighborhood of the store,
Preston sought out the house where Gerard had boarded during his stay in
Mount Clemens. There he found that the missing merchant, in order to
allay suspicion, had paid the rental of his apartment for three months
in advance, and that the place had not been touched since, save by the
local authorities who had been working on the case.

"You won't find a thing there," the chief of police informed Hal, in
response to a request for information. "Gerard's skipped and that's all
there is to it. We've been over the place with a fine-tooth comb and
there ain't a scrap of evidence. We did find some telegrams torn up in
his waste basket, but if you can make anything out of 'em it's more than
I can," and he handed over an envelope filled with scraps of finely torn
yellow paper.

"Not the slightest indication of where Gerard went?" inquired Preston as
he tucked the envelope in an inside pocket.

"Not a bit," echoed the chief. "He may be in China now, so far as we
know."

"Was he married?"

"Nobody here knows nothin' about him," the chief persisted. "They do say
as how he was right sweet on a girl named Anna Something-or-other who
lived in the same block. But she left town before he did, and she 'ain't
come back, neither."

"What did you say her name was?"

"Anna Vaughan, I b'lieve she called herself. You might ask Mrs. Morris
about her. She had a room at her place, only a few doors away from
where Gerard stayed."

The apartment of the man who had vanished, Preston found, was furnished
in the manner typical of a thousand other places. Every stick of
furniture appeared to have seen better days and no two pieces could be
said to match. Evidently Gerard had been practicing economy in his
domestic arrangements in order to save all the money possible for a
quick getaway. What was more, he had carefully removed everything of a
personal nature, save a row of books which decorated the mantel piece in
one of the rooms.

It was toward these that Preston finally turned in desperation. All but
one of them were the cheaper grade of fiction, none of which bore any
distinguishing marks, but the exception was a new copy of the latest
Railroad Guide. Just as Preston pounced upon this he heard a chuckle
from behind him and, whirling, saw the chief of police just entering the
door.

"Needn't worry with that, young man," he urged. "I've been all through
it and there ain't nothin' in it. Just thought I'd drop up to see if
you'd found anything," he added, in explanation of his sudden
appearance. "Have you?"

"No," admitted the postal operative. "Can't say that I have. This is the
first piece of personal property that I've been able to locate and you
say there is nothing in this?"

"Nary a clue," persisted the chief, but Preston, as if loath to drop the
only tangible reminder of Gerard, idly flipped the pages of the Guide,
and then stood it on edge on the table, the covers slightly opened.
Then, as the chief watched him curiously, he closed the book, opened it
again and repeated the operation.

"What's the idea? Tryin' to make it do tricks?" the chief asked as Hal
stood the book on edge for the third time.

"Hardly that. Just working on a little theory of my own," was the
response, as the post-office man made a careful note of the page at
which the Guide had fallen open--the same one which had presented itself
to view on the two other occasions. "Here, would you like to try it?"
and he handed the volume to the chief. But that functionary only
shrugged his shoulders and replaced the Guide upon the mantelpiece.

"Some more of your highfalutin' detective work, eh?" he muttered. "Soon
you'll be claimin' that books can talk."

"Possibly not out loud," smiled Hal. "But they can be made to tell very
interesting stories now and then, if you know how to handle 'em. There
doesn't seem to be much here, Chief, so I think I'll go back to the
hotel. Let me know if anything comes up, will you?" And with that he
left.

But before returning to the hotel he stopped at the house where Anna
Vaughan had resided and found out from the rather garrulous landlady
that Gerard had appeared to be rather smitten with the beautiful
stranger.

"She certainly was dressed to kill," said the woman who ran the
establishment. "A big woman and strong as all outdoors. Mr. Gerard came
here three or four nights a week while she was with us and he didn't
seem to mind the mice at all."

"Mind the what?" snapped Preston.

"The mice--the white mice that she used to keep as pets," explained the
landlady. "Had half a dozen or more of them running over her shoulders,
but I told her that I couldn't stand for that. She could keep 'em in
her room if she wanted to, but I had to draw the line somewhere. Guess
it was on their account that she didn't have any other visitors. S'far
as I know Mr. Gerard was the only one who called on her."

"When did Miss Vaughan leave?" Hal inquired.

"Mrs. Vaughan," corrected the woman. "She was a widow--though she was
young and pretty enough to have been married any time she wanted to be.
Guess the men wouldn't stand for them mice, though. She didn't stay very
long--just about six weeks. Left somewheres about the middle of July."

"About two weeks before Gerard did?"

"About that--though I don't just remember the date."

A few more inquiries elicited the fact that Mrs. Vaughan's room had been
rented since her departure, so Preston gave up the idea of looking
through it for possible connecting links with the expert in bankruptcy.

Returning to the hotel, the operative settled down to an examination of
the scraps of torn telegrams which the chief had handed him. Evidently
they had been significant, he argued, for Gerard had been careful to
tear them into small bits, and it was long past midnight before he had
succeeded in piecing the messages together, pasting the scraps on glass
in case there had been any notations on the reverse of the blank.

But when he had finished he found that he had only added one more
puzzling aspect to the case.

There were three telegrams, filed within a week and all dated just
before Gerard had left town.

"Geraldine, Anna, May, and Florence are in Chicago," read the message
from Evanston, Illinois.

"George, William, Katherine, Ray, and Stephen still in St. Louis," was
the wire filed from Detroit.

The third message, from Minneapolis, detailed the fact that "Frank,
Vera, Marguerite, Joe, and Walter are ready to leave St. Paul."

None of the telegrams was signed, but, merely as a precaution, Preston
wired Evanston, Detroit, and Minneapolis to find out if there was any
record of who had sent them.

"Agent here recalls message," came the answer from Detroit the next day.
"Filed by woman who refused to give her name. Agent says sender was
quite large, good-looking, and very well dressed."

"Anna Vaughan!" muttered Preston, as he tucked the telegram in his
pocket and asked to be shown a copy of the latest Railway Guide.

Referring to a note which he had made on the previous evening, Hal
turned to pages 251-2, the part of the book which had fallen open three
times in succession when he had examined it in Gerard's rooms, and noted
that it was the Atchinson, Topeka & Santa Fé time-table, westbound.
Evidently the missing merchant had invested in a copy of the Guide
rather than run the risk of leaving telltale time-tables around his
apartment, but he had overstepped himself by referring to only one
portion of the book.

"Not the first time that a crook has been just a little too clever,"
mused Preston, with a smile. "If it had been an old copy, there wouldn't
have been any evidence--but a new book, opened several times at the same
place, can be made to tell tales--his honor, the chief of police, to the
contrary."

It was clear, therefore, that Preston had three leads to work on: Anna
Vaughan, a large, beautiful woman, well-dressed and with an affection
for white mice; the clue that Gerard was somewhere in the Southwest and
at least the first names of fourteen men and women connected with the
gang.

But right there he paused. Was there any gang? The dates of the various
disappearances tended to prove that there wasn't, but the messages
received by Gerard certainly appeared to point to the fact that others
were connected with the conspiracy to defraud.

Possibly one of the clerks who had been connected with the Gerard stores
would be able to throw a little light upon the situation....

It wasn't until Hal interviewed the woman who had acted as cashier and
manager for the second store that he found the lead he was after. In
response to his inquiry as to whether she had ever heard the missing
proprietor speak of any of the persons mentioned in the wires, the
cashier at first stated definitely that she hadn't, but added, a moment
later:

"Come to think of it, he did. Not as people, but as trunks."

"What's that?" exclaimed the operative. "Trunks?"

"Yes. I remember sometime last spring, when we were figuring on how much
summer goods we ought to carry, I mentioned the matter to Mr. Gerard,
and almost automatically he replied, 'I'll wire for Edna and Grace.'
Thinking he meant saleswomen, I reminded him that we had plenty,
particularly for the slack season. He colored up a bit, caught his
breath, and turned the subject by stating that he always referred to
trunks of goods in terms of people's first names--girls for the feminine
stuff and men's for the masculine. But Edna and Grace weren't on your
list, were they?"

"No," replied Preston. "But that doesn't matter. Besides, didn't the two
trunks of goods arrive?"

"Yes, they came in a couple of weeks later."

"Before Mrs. Vaughan came to town?"

"Oh yes, some time before she arrived."

"I thought so," was Preston's reply, and, thanking the girl, he wandered
back to the hotel--convinced that he had solved at least one of the
mysteries, the question of what Gerard did with his surplus "bankrupt
stock." It was evidently packed in trunks and shipped to distant points,
to be forwarded by the Vaughan woman upon instructions from Gerard
himself. The wires he had torn up were merely confirmatory messages,
sent so that he would have the necessary information before making a
getaway.

"Clever scheme, all right," was Hal's mental comment. "Now the next
point is to find some town in the Southwest where a new store has been
opened within the past two months."

That night the telegraph office at Mount Clemens did more business than
it had had for the past year. Wires, under the government frank, went
out to every town on the Atchinson, Topeka & Santa Fé and to a number of
adjacent cities. In each case the message was the same:

     Wire name of any new clothing store opened within past two
     months. Also description of proprietor. Urgent.

                                              PRESTON,
                                                U. S. P. I. S.

Fourteen chiefs of police replied within the next forty-eight hours, but
of these only two--Leavenworth and Fort Worth--contained descriptions
which tallied with that of Henry Gerard.

So, to facilitate matters, Preston sent another wire:

     Has proprietor mentioned in yesterday's wire a wife or woman
     friend who keeps white mice as pets?

Fort Worth replied facetiously that the owner of the new store there was
married, but that his wife had a cat--which might account for the
absence of the mice. Leavenworth, however, came back with:

     Yes, Mrs. Noble, wife of owner of Outlet Store, has white
     mice for pets. Why?

     Never mind reason [Preston replied]. Watch Noble and wife
     until I arrive. Leaving to-day.

Ten minutes after reaching Leavenworth Preston was ensconced in the
office of the chief of police, outlining the reason for his visit.

"I'm certain that Noble is the man you want," said the chief, when Hal
had finished. "He came here some six weeks or more ago and at once
leased a store, which he opened a few days later. The description fits
him to a T, except for the fact that he's evidently dispensed with the
mustache. The Vaughan woman is posing as his wife and they've rented a
house on the outskirts of town. What do you want me to do? Nab 'em right
away?"

"No," directed the operative. "I'd rather attend to that myself, if you
don't object. After trailing them this far, I'd like to go through with
it. You might have some men handy, though, in case there's any fuss."

Just as Mr. and Mrs. C. K. Noble were sitting down to dinner there was a
ring at their front-door bell and Noble went to see who it was.

"I'd like to speak to Mr. H. Gordon Fowler," said Preston, his hand
resting carelessly in the side pocket of his coat.

"No Mr. Fowler lives here," was the growling reply from the inside.

"Then Mr. W. C. Evans or Mr. Henry Gerard will do!" snapped the
operative, throwing his shoulder against the partly opened door.
Noble--or Fowler, as he was afterward known--stepped aside as Hal
plunged through, and then slammed the door behind him.

"Get him, Anna!" he called, throwing the safety bolt into position.

The next thing that Preston knew, a pair of arms, bare and feminine but
strong as iron, had seized him around the waist and he was in imminent
danger of being bested by a woman. With a heave and a wriggling twist he
broke the hold and turned, just in time to see Fowler snatch a revolver
from a desk on the opposite side of the room and raise it into position.
Without an instant's hesitation he leaped to one side, dropped his hand
into his coat pocket, and fired. Evidently the bullet took effect, for
the man across the room dropped his gun, spun clean around and then sank
to the floor. As he did so, however, the woman hurled a heavy vase
directly at Preston's head and the operative sank unconscious.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, go on!" I snapped, when Quinn paused. "You sound like a serial
story--to be continued in our next. What happened then?"

"Nothing--beyond the fact that three policemen broke in some ten seconds
after Hal fired, grabbed Mrs. Vaughan or whatever her name was, and kept
her from beating Hal to death, as she certainly would have done in
another minute. Fowler wasn't badly hurt. In fact, both of them stood
trial the next spring--Fowler drawing six years and Anna Vaughan one.
Incidentally, they sent 'em back to Leavenworth to do time and, as a
great concession, allowed the woman to take two of her white mice with
her. I managed to get one of the other four, and, when it died, had it
stuffed as a memento of a puzzling case well solved.

"It's a hobby of mine--keeping these relics. That hatchet, for
example.... Remind me to tell you about it some time. The mice were
responsible for finding one man in fifty million--which is something of
a job in itself--but the hatchet figured in an even more exciting
affair...."




XIV

WAH LEE AND THE FLOWER OF HEAVEN


"Yes, there's quite a story attached to that," remarked Bill Quinn one
evening as the conversation first lagged and then drifted away into
silence. We were seated in his den at the time--the "library" which he
had ornamented with relics of a score or more of cases in which the
various governmental detective services had distinguished
themselves--and I came to with a start.

"What?" I exclaimed. "Story in what?"

"In that hatchet--the one on the wall there that you were speculating
about. It didn't take a psychological sleuth to follow your eyes and
read the look of speculation in them. That's a trick that a 'sparrow
cop' could pull!"

"Well, then, suppose you pay the penalty for your wisdom--and spin the
yarn," I retorted, none the less glad of the opportunity to hear the
facts behind the sinister red stain which appeared on the blade of the
Chinese weapon, for I knew that Quinn could give them to me if he
wished.

"Frankly, I don't know the full history of the hatchet," came the answer
from the other side of the fireplace. "Possibly it goes back to the Ming
dynasty--whenever that was--or possibly it was purchased from a
mail-order house in Chicago. Chop suey isn't the only Chinese article
made in this country, you know. But my interest in it commenced with the
night when Ezra Marks--

"However, let's start at the beginning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Marks [continued the former operative] was, as you probably recall, one
of the best men ever connected with the Customs Service. It was he who
solved the biggest diamond-smuggling case on record, and he was also
responsible for the discovery of the manner in which thirty thousand
yards of very valuable silk was being run into the country every year
without visiting the custom office. That's a piece of the silk up there,
over the picture of Mrs. Armitage....

It wasn't many months before the affair of the Dillingham diamonds that
official Washington in general and the offices of the Customs Service in
particular grew quite excited over the fact that a lot of opium was
finding its way into California. Of course, there's always a fair amount
of "hop" on the market, provided you know where to look for it, and the
government has about as much chance of keeping it out altogether as it
has of breaking up the trade in moonshine whisky. The mountaineer is
going to have his "licker" and the Chink is going to have his dope--no
matter what you do. But it's up to the Internal Revenue Bureau and the
Customs Service to see that neither one arrives in wholesale quantities.
And that was just what was happening on the Coast.

In fact, it was coming in so fast that the price was dropping every day
and the California authorities fairly burned up the wires 'cross
continent with their howls for help.

At that time Marks--Ezra by name and "E. Z." by nickname--was
comparatively a new member of the force. He had rendered valuable
service in Boston, however, and the chief sent for him and put the whole
thing in his hands.

"Get out to San Diego as quickly as you know how," snapped the chief,
tossing over a sheaf of yellow telegraph slips. "There's all the
information we have, and apparently you won't get much more out
there--unless you dig it up for yourself. All they seem to know is that
the stuff is coming in by the carload and is being peddled in all the
hop joints at a lower price than ever before. It's up to you to get the
details. Any help you need will be supplied from the San Francisco
office, but my advice is to play a lone hand--you're likely to get
further than if you have a gang with you all the time."

"That's my idear, Chief," drawled Ezra, who hailed from Vermont and had
all the New Englander's affection for single-handed effort, not because
he had the least objection to sharing the glory, but simply because he
considered it the most efficient way to work. "I'll get right out there
and see how the land lays."

"Needn't bother to report until you discover something worth while,"
added the chief. "I'll know that you're on the job and the farther you
keep away from headquarters the less suspicion you're likely to arouse."

This was the reason that, beyond the fact they knew that an operative
named Marks had been sent from Washington to look into the opium matter,
the government agents on the Coast were completely in the dark as to the
way in which the affair was being handled. In fact, the chief himself
was pretty well worried when two months slipped by without a word from
Ezra....

But the big, raw-boned Yankee was having troubles of his own. Likewise,
he took his instructions very seriously and didn't see the least reason
for informing Washington of the very patent fact that he had gotten
nowhere and found out nothing.

"They know where they can reach me," he argued to himself one night,
about the time that the chief began to wonder if his man were floating
around the bay with a piece of Chinese rope about his neck. "Unless I
get a wire they won't hear anything until I have at least a line on this
gang."

Then, on going over the evidence which he had collected during the weeks
that he had been in San Diego, he found that there was extremely little
of it. Discreet questioning had developed the fact, which he already
knew, that opium was plentiful all along the Coast, and that,
presumably, it was supplied from a point in the south of the state. But
all his efforts to locate the source of the drug brought him up against
a blank wall.

In order to conduct his investigations with a minimum of suspicion,
Marks had elected to enter San Diego in the guise of a derelict--a
character which he had played to such perfection that two weeks after he
arrived he found himself in court on the charge of vagrancy. Only the
fact that the presiding magistrate did not believe in sentencing first
offenders saved him from ten days in the workhouse, an opportunity which
he was rather sorry to miss because he figured that he might pick up
some valuable leads from the opium addicts among his fellow prisoners.

The only new point which he had developed during his stay in the
underworld was that some one named Sprague, presumably an American, was
the brains of the opium ring and had perfected the entire plan. But who
Sprague was or where he might be found were matters which were kept in
very watchful secrecy.

"I give it up," muttered the operative, shrugging his arms into a
threadbare coat and shambling out of the disreputable rooming house
which passed for home. "Work doesn't seem to get me anywhere. Guess I'll
have to trust to luck," and he wandered out for his nightly stroll
through the Chinese quarter, hoping against hope that something would
happen.

It did--in bunches!

Possibly it was luck, possibly it was fate--which, after all, is only
another name for luck--that brought him into an especially unsavory
portion of the city shortly after midnight.

He had wandered along for three hours or more, with no objective in view
save occasional visits to dives where he was known, when he heard
something which caused him to whirl and automatically reach for his hip
pocket. It was the cry of a woman, shrill and clear--the cry of a woman
in mortal danger!

It had only sounded once, but there was a peculiar muffled quality at
the end of the note, suggestive of a hand or a gag having been placed
over the woman's mouth. Then--silence, so still as to be almost
oppressive.

Puzzled, Marks stood stock still and waited. So far as he could remember
that was the first time that he had heard anything of the kind in
Chinatown. He knew that there were women there, but they were kept well
in the background and, apparently, were content with their lot. The
woman who had screamed, however, was in danger of her life. Behind one
of those flimsy walls some drama was being enacted in defiance of the
law--something was being done which meant danger of the most deadly kind
to him who dared to interfere.

For a full minute Marks weighed the importance of his official mission
against his sense of humanity. Should he take a chance on losing his
prey merely to try to save a woman's life? Should he attempt to find the
house from which the scream had come and force the door? Should he....

But the question was solved for him in a manner even more startling than
the cry in the night.

While he was still debating the door of a house directly in front of him
opened wide and a blinding glare of light spread fanwise into the
street. Across this there shot the figure of what Marks at first took to
be a man--a figure attired in a long, heavily embroidered jacket and
silken trousers. As it neared him, however, the operative sensed that it
was a woman, and an instant later he knew that it was the woman whose
stifled scream had halted him only a moment before.

Straight toward Marks she came and, close behind her--their faces set in
a look of deadly implacable rage--raced two large Chinamen.

Probably realizing that she stood no chance of escape in the open
street, the woman darted behind Marks and prepared to dodge her
pursuers. As she did so the operative caught her panting appeal: "Save
me! For the sake of the God, save me!"

That was all that was necessary. Ezra sensed in an instant the fact that
he had become embroiled in what bade fair to be a tragedy and braced
himself for action. He knew that he had no chance for holding off both
men, particularly as he did not care to precipitate gun play, but there
was the hope that he might divert them until the girl escaped.

As the first of the two men leaped toward him, Marks swung straight for
his jaw, but his assailant ducked with what was almost professional
rapidity and the blow was only a glancing one. Before the operative had
time to get set the other man was upon him and, in utter silence save
for their labored breathing and dull thuds as blows went home, they
fought their way back to the far side of the street. As he retreated,
Marks became conscious that instead of making her escape, the girl was
still behind him. The reason for this became apparent when the larger of
the Chinamen suddenly raised his arm and the light from the open doorway
glinted on the blade of a murderous short-handled axe--the favorite
weapon of Tong warfare. Straight for his head the blade descended, but
the girl's arm, thrust out of the darkness behind him, diverted the blow
and the hatchet fairly whistled as it passed within an inch of his body.

Realizing that his only hope of safety lay in reaching the opposite side
of the sidewalk, where he would be able to fight with his back against
the wall, Marks resumed his retreat, his arms moving like flails, his
fists crashing home blows that lost much of their power by reason of the
heavily padded jackets of his opponents. Finally, after seconds that
seemed like hours, one of his blows found the jaw of the man nearest
him, and Marks wheeled to set himself for the onrush of the other--the
man with the hatchet.

But just at that moment his foot struck the uneven curbing and threw him
off his balance. He was conscious of an arc of light as the blade sang
through the air; he heard a high, half-muffled cry from the girl beside
him; and he remembered trying to throw himself out of the way of the
hatchet. Then there was a stinging, smarting pain in the side of his
head and in his left shoulder--followed by the blackness of oblivion.

From somewhere, apparently a long distance off, there came a voice which
brought back at least a part of the operative's fast failing
consciousness, a voice which called a name vaguely familiar to him:

"Sprague! Sprague!"

"Sprague?" muttered Marks, trying to collect himself.
"Who--is--Sprague?"

Then, as he put it later, he "went off."

How much time elapsed before he came to he was unable to say, but
subsequent developments indicated that it was at least a day and a
night. He hadn't the slightest idea what had occurred meanwhile--he only
knew that he seemed to drift back to consciousness and a realization
that his head was splitting as if it would burst. Mechanically he
stretched his legs and tried to rise, only to find that what appeared to
be a wooden wall closed him in on all sides, leaving an opening only
directly above him.

For an appreciable time he lay still, trying to collect his thoughts. He
recalled the fight in the open street, the intervention of the girl, the
fall over the curb and then--there was something that he couldn't
remember, something vital that had occurred just after he had tried to
dodge the hatchet blade.

"Yes," he murmured, as memory returned, "it was some one calling for
'Sprague--Sprague!'"

"Hush!" came a whispered command out of the darkness which surrounded
him, and a hand, soft and very evidently feminine, covered his mouth.
"You must not mention that name here. It means the death, instant and
terrible! They are discussing your fate in there now, but if they had
thought that you knew Wah Lee your life would not be worth a yen."

"Wah Lee? Who is he?" Marks replied, his voice pitched in an undertone.
"I don't remember any Wah Lee. And who are you?"

"Who I am does not matter," came out of the darkness, "but Wah Lee--he
is the master of life and death--the high priest of the Flower of
Heaven. Had it not been for him you would have been dead before this."

"But I thought--"

"That he desired your life? So he did--and does. But they have to plan
the way in which it is to be taken and the disposition which is to be
made of your body. That was what gave me my opportunity for binding up
your wound and watching for you to wake."

In spite of himself Marks could not repress a slight shudder. So they
were saving him for the sacrifice, eh? They were going to keep him here
until their arrangements were complete and then make away with him, were
they?

Moving cautiously, so as to avoid attracting attention, the operative
slipped his right hand toward his hip pocket, only to find that his
automatic was missing. As he settled back with a half moan, he felt
something cold slipped into the box beside him, and the girl's voice
whispered:

"Your revolver. I secured it when they brought you in here. I thought
you might need it later. But be very careful. They must not suspect that
you have wakened."

"I will," promised Marks, "but who are you? Why should you take such an
interest in me?"

"You tried to save me from something that is worse than death," replied
the girl. "You failed, but it was not your fault. Could I do less than
to help you?"

"But what was it you feared?"

"Marriage! Marriage to the man I loathe above all others--the man who is
responsible for the opium that is drugging my people--the man who is
known as Wah Lee, but who is really an American." Here she hesitated for
a moment and then hissed:

"Sprague!"

"Sprague?" Marks echoed, sitting bolt upright. But the girl had gone,
swallowed up somewhere in the impenetrable darkness which filled the
room.

His brain cleared by the realization that he had blundered into the
heart of the opium-runners' den, it took Ezra only a few seconds to
formulate a plan of action. The first thing, of course, was to get away.
But how could that be accomplished when he did not even know where he
was or anything about the house? The girl had said something about the
fact that "they were considering his fate." Who were "they" and where
were they?

Obviously, the only way to find this out was to do a little scouting on
his own account, so, slowly and carefully, he raised himself clear of
the boxlike arrangement in which he had been placed and tried to figure
out his surroundings. His hand, groping over the side, came into almost
instant contact with the floor and he found it a simple matter to step
out into what appeared to be a cleared space in the center of a
comparatively large room. Then, curious as to the place where he had
been concealed, he felt the box from one end to the other. The sides
were about two feet high and slightly sloping, with an angle near the
head. In fact, both ends of the affair were narrower than the portion
which had been occupied by his shoulders. Piled up at either end of this
box were others, of the same shape and size. What could their purpose
be? Why the odd shape?

Suddenly the solution of the mystery flashed across the operative's
mind--coffins! Coffins which appeared to be piled up on all sides of the
storeroom. Was this the warehouse for a Chinese undertaker or was it--

One coffin over which he nearly tripped gave him the answer. It was
partly filled with cans, unlabeled and quite heavy--containers which
Marks felt certain were packed full of opium and smuggled in some manner
inside the coffins.

Just as he arrived at this conclusion Marks' eye was caught by a tiny
streak of light filtering through the wall on the opposite side of the
room. Making his way carefully toward this, he found that the crack
presented a fairly complete view of an adjoining apartment in which
three Chinese, evidently of high degree, were sorting money and entering
accounts in large books.

As he looked, a fourth figure entered the room--a man who caused him to
catch his breath and flatten himself against the wall, for he recognized
the larger of the two Chinamen who had attacked him the night before--or
whenever it was. This was the man to whom the girl had alluded as "Wah
Lee, High Priest of the Flower of Heaven"--which was merely another way
of saying that he had charge of the opium shipments.

As he entered the others rose and remained standing until he had seated
himself. Then one of them commenced to speak in rapid, undistinguishable
Chinese. Before he had had time to pronounce more than a few words,
however, Wah Lee interrupted him with a command couched in English to:
"Cut that out! You know I don't understand that gibberish well enough to
follow you."

"Beg pardon," replied the other. "I always forget. You are so like one
of us that, even in private, I find it hard to remember."

Wah Lee said nothing, but, slipping off his silken jacket, settled back
at his ease. A moment later Marks was amazed to see him remove his
mandarin's cap, and with it came a wig of coal-black hair!

For the first time the government agent realized what the girl had meant
when she intimated that Wah Lee and Sprague were one and the same--an
American who was masquerading as Chinese in order to further his
smuggling plans!

"Word has just arrived," continued the man who had first spoken, "that
the boat will be off Point Banda to-night. That will allow us to pick up
the coffins before daybreak and bury them until such time as the
American hounds are off their guard."

"Yes," grunted Sprague, "and let's hope that that's soon. We must have
fifty thousand dollars' worth of the stuff cached on the other side of
the border and orders are coming in faster than we can fill them. I
think it would be best to run this cargo right in. We can stage a
funeral, if necessary, and avoid suspicion in that way. Wait a minute!
I've got a hunch! What about the bum we carried in here last night--the
one that tried to help Anita in her getaway?"

"Anita?"

"Yes, my girl. I can't remember that rigmarole you people call her.
Anita's her name from now on."

"He is in the next room, unconscious. Two of the men dumped him in one
of the empty coffins and let him stay there."

"Good," chuckled Sprague. "We'll just let him remain--run him across the
border, and bring his body back in a big hearse. The coffin and the body
will be real, but there'll be enough cans of dope packed in and around
him and in the carriages of the 'mourners' to make us all rich. It's the
chance of a lifetime for a big play, because no one will ever suspect us
or even inquire into his identity."

Behind the thin wall which separated him from the next room Marks
stiffened and his fingers wound themselves even more tightly around the
butt of his automatic. It is not given to many men to hear their death
sentence pronounced in a manner as dramatic and cold-blooded as were the
words which came from the outer apartment. By listening intently, Ezra
learned that the coup would be sprung sometime within the next few
hours, the conspirators feeling that it would not be safe to delay, as
the opium shipment was due before dawn.

Moving silently and aided somewhat by the fact that his eyes had become
a little accustomed to the inky blackness, Marks made his way back to
the place where he had awakened. He knew that that was where they would
expect to find him and he also knew that this was the one place to
avoid. So he located the door and, finding it bolted from the outside,
placed himself where he would be at least partly sheltered when the
party entered.

After what seemed to be an interminable time he finally heard a sound
from the hallway--the soft slip-slip of felt shoes approaching. Then the
bolt was withdrawn and the door opened, admitting the four men whom he
had seen in the other room, and behind them, carrying a lantern, came
the girl.

Nerving himself for a supreme leap, Marks waited until all five visitors
were inside the room, and then started to slip through the open doorway.
But his movement attracted the attention of the man called Sprague and,
with a cry of warning, he wheeled and fired before the operative could
gain the safety of the hall. Knowing that his body, outlined against the
light from outside, would make an ideal target, Ezra dropped to the
floor and swung his automatic into action. As he did so the girl
extinguished the lantern with a single swift blow, leaving the room in
total blackness, save for the path made by the light in the hallway.

For probably twenty seconds there wasn't a sound. Then Marks caught a
glimpse of a moving figure and fired, leaping to one side as he did so
in order to avoid the fusillade directed at the flash of his revolver.
By a cry from the other side of the room he knew that his shot had gone
home, and a moment later he had an opportunity to wing another of his
assailants, again drawing a volley of shots. The last shot in his clip
was fired with a prayer--but it evidently went home, for only silence,
punctuated by moans from the opposite side of the room, ensued.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That night," concluded Quinn, "a big sailing vessel was met off Point
Banda and they found a full month's supply of opium aboard of her. A
search of Lower California, near the border, also disclosed a burying
ground with many of the graves packed with cans of the drug. The raid,
of course, was a violation of Mexican neutrality--but they got away with
it."

"The girl?" I cut in. "What became of her?"

"When the police reached the house a few moments after Marks had fired
the last shot, they found that Sprague was dead with one of Ezra's
bullets through his brain. The three Chinamen were wounded, but not
fatally. The girl, however, was huddled in a corner, dead. No one ever
discovered whether she stopped one of the bullets from Marks's revolver
or whether she was killed by Sprague's men as a penalty for putting out
the lantern. Undoubtedly, that saved Ezra's life--which was the reason
that he saw that she was given a decent funeral and an adequate memorial
erected over her grave.

"He also kept her jacket as a memento of the affair, turning the hatchet
over to me for my collection. Under it you will find a copy of the wire
he sent the chief."

Curious, I went over and read the yellow slip framed beneath the weapon:

     Opium smuggled in coffins. American, at head of ring, dead.
     Gang broken up. Opium seized. What next?

                                              MARKS.

"Didn't wait long for another assignment, did he?" I inquired.

"No," was the response. "When you're working for Uncle Sam you come to
find that excitement is about the only thing that keeps your nerves
quiet. Sometimes, as in Marks's case, it's the thrill of the actual
combat. But more often it's the search for a tangible clue--the groping
in the dark for something you know exists but which you can't lay your
hands on. That was the trouble with the Cheney case...."




XV

THE MAN WITH THREE WIVES


One of the first things to strike the eye of the visitor who enters the
library-den of William J. Quinn--known to his friends and former
associates in the United States Secret Service as "Bill"--is a frame
which stands upon the mantel and contains the photographs of three
exceptionally pretty women.

Anyone who doesn't know that this room is consecrated to relics of the
exploits of the various governmental detective services might be
pardoned for supposing that the three pictures in the single frame are
photographs of relatives. Only closer inspection will reveal the fact
that beneath them appears a transcript from several pages of a certain
book of records--the original of which is kept at the New York City
Hall.

These pages state that....

But suppose we let Quinn tell the story, just as he told it one cold
November night while the wind was whistling outside and the cheery
warmth of the fire made things extremely snug within.

       *       *       *       *       *

Secret Service men [said Quinn] divide all of their cases into two
classes--those which call for quick action and plenty of it and those
which demand a great deal of thought and only an hour or so of actual
physical work. Your typical operative--Allison, who was responsible for
solving the poison-pen puzzle, for example, or Hal Preston, who
penetrated the mystery surrounding the murder of Montgomery Marshall--is
essentially a man of action. He likes to tackle a job and get it over
with. It doesn't make any difference if he has to round up a half dozen
counterfeiters at the point of a single revolver--as Tommy Callahan once
did--or break up a gang of train robbers who have sworn never to be
taken alive. As long as he has plenty of thrills and excitement, as long
as he is able to get some joy out of life, he doesn't give a hang for
the risk. That's his business and he loves it.

But it's the long-drawn-out cases which he has to ponder over and
consider from a score of angles that, in the vernacular of vaudeville,
capture his Angora. Give him an assignment where he can trail his man
for a day or two, get the lay of the land, and then drop on the bunch
like a ton o' brick and everything's fine. Give him one of the other
kind and--well, he's just about as happy as Guy Randall was when they
turned him loose with instructions to get something on Carl Cheney.

Remember during the early days of the war when the papers were full of
stories from New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Milwaukee and points west
about gatherings of pro-German sympathizers who were determined to aid
the Fatherland? Theoretically, we were neutral at that time and these
people had all the scope they wanted. They did not confine themselves to
talk, however, but laid several plans which were destined to annoy the
government and to keep several hundred operatives busy defeating
them--for they were aimed directly at our policy of neutrality.

As a campaign fund to assure the success of these operations, the German
sympathizers raised not less than sixteen million dollars--a sum which
naturally excited the cupidity not only of certain individuals within
their own ranks, but also of persons on the outside--men who were
accustomed to live by their wits and who saw in this gigantic collection
the opportunity of a lifetime.

When you consider that you can hire a New York gangster to commit murder
for a couple of hundred dollars--and the "union scale" has been known to
be even lower--it's no wonder that the mere mention of sixteen million
dollars caused many a crook of international reputation to figure how he
could divert at least a part of this to his own bank account. That's the
way, as it afterward turned out, that Carl Cheney looked at it.

Cheney had rubbed elbows with the police on several occasions prior to
nineteen fourteen. It was suspected that he had been mixed up in a
number of exceptionally clever smuggling schemes and that he had had a
finger in one or two operations which came perilously close to
blackmail. But no one had ever been able to get anything on him. He was
the original Finnigin--"In agin, gone agin." By the time the plan came
to a successful conclusion all that remained of "Count Carl's"
connection with it was a vague and distinctly nebulous shadow--and you
simply can't arrest shadows, no matter how hard you try.

The New York police were the first to tip Washington off to the fact
that Cheney, who had dropped his aristocratic alias for the time being,
was back in this country and had been seen in the company of a number of
prominent members of a certain German-American club which wasn't in any
too good repute with the Department of Justice by reason of the efforts
of some of its members to destroy the neutral stand of the nation.

     Have no indications of what Cheney is doing [the report
     admitted], but it will be well to trail him. Apparently he
     has some connection, officially or unofficially, with
     Berlin. Advise what action you wish us to take.

Whereupon the chief wired back:

     Operative assigned to Cheney case leaves to-night. Meanwhile
     please watch.

It wasn't until after the wire had been sent that Guy Randall was
summoned to the inner sanctum of the Secret Service and informed that he
had been elected to trail the elusive suspect and find out what he was
up to.

"So far as our records show," stated the chief, "no one has ever been
able to catch this Cheney person in the act of departing from the
straight and narrow path. However, that's a matter of the past. What
we've got to find out is what he is planning now--why he is in New York
and why he has attached himself to the pro-German element which has all
kinds of wild schemes up its sleeve."

"And I'm the one who's got to handle it?" inquired Guy, with a grimace.

"Precisely," grinned the chief. "Oh, I know it doesn't look like much of
a job and I grant you that the thrill element will probably be lacking.
But you can't draw a snap every time. All that's asked is that you get
something on Cheney--something which will withstand the assaults of the
lawyers he will undoubtedly hire the minute we lay hands on him.
Therefore you've got to be mighty careful to have the right dope. If
you're satisfied that he's doing nothing out of the way, don't hesitate
to say so. But I don't expect that your report will clear him, for, from
what we already know of the gentleman, he's more likely to be implicated
in some plan aimed directly at a violation of neutrality, and it's
essential that we find out what that is before we take any radical
step."

"What do you know about Cheney?" was Randall's next question, followed
by an explanation from the chief that the "count" had been suspected in
a number of cases and had barely been able to escape in time.

"But," added the head of the Secret Service, "he did escape. And that's
what we have to prevent this time. He's a fast worker and a clever
one--which means that you've got to keep continually after him. Call in
all the help you need, but if you take my advice you'll handle the case
alone. You're apt to get a lot further that way."

Agreeing that this was the best method to pursue, Randall caught the
midnight train for New York and went at once to police headquarters,
where he requested a full description of Cheney's previous activities.

"You're asking for something what ain't," he was informed,
ungrammatically, but truthfully. "We've never been able to get a thing
on the count, though we're dead certain that he had a finger in several
crooked plays. The Latimer letters were never directly traced to him,
but it's a cinch that he had something to do with their preparation,
just as he had with the blackmailing of old man Branchfield and the
smuggling of the van Husen emeralds. You remember that case, don't you?
The one where the stones were concealed in a life preserver and they
staged a 'man overboard' stunt just as the ship came into the harbor.
Nobody ever got the stones or proved that they were actually
smuggled--but the count happened to be on the ship at the time, just as
he 'happened' to be in Paris when they were sold. We didn't even dare
arrest him, which accounts for the fact that his photograph doesn't
ornament the Rogues' Gallery."

"Well, what's the idea of trailing him, then?"

"Just to find out what he is doing. What d'ye call those birds that fly
around at sea just before a gale breaks--stormy petrels? That's the
count! He's a stormy petrel of crookedness. Something goes wrong every
time he hits a town--or, rather, just after he leaves, for he's too
clever to stick around too long. The question now is, What's this
particular storm and when is it goin' to break?"

"Fine job to turn me loose on," grumbled Randall.

"It is that," laughed the captain who was dispensing information. "But
you can never tell what you'll run into, me boy. Why I remember once--"

Randall, however, was out of the office before the official had gotten
well started on his reminiscences. He figured that he had already had
too much of a grouch to listen patiently to some long-winded story dug
out of the musty archives of police history and he made his way at once
to the hotel where Carl Cheney was registered, flaunting his own name in
front of the police whom he must have known were watching him.

Neither the house detective nor the plain-clothes man who had been
delegated to trail Cheney could add anything of interest to the little
that Randall already knew. The "count," they said, had conducted himself
in a most circumspect manner and had not been actually seen in
conference with any of the Germans with whom he was supposed to be in
league.

"He's too slick for that," added the man from the Central Office.
"Whenever he's got a conference on he goes up to the Club and you can't
get in there with anything less than a battering ram and raiding squad.
There's no chance to plant a dictaphone, and how else are you going to
get the information?"

"What does he do at other times?" countered Guy, preferring not to
reply to the former question until he had gotten a better line on the
case.

"Behaves himself," was the laconic answer. "Takes a drive in the Park in
the afternoon, dines here or at one of the other hotels, goes to the
theater and usually finishes up with a little supper somewhere among the
white lights."

"Any women in sight?"

"Yes--two. A blond from the girl-show that's playin' at the
Knickerbocker and a red-head. Don't know who she is--but they're both
good lookers. No scandal, though. Everything appears to be on the
level--even the women."

"Well," mused the government operative after a moment's silence, "I
guess I better get on the job. Probably means a long stretch of dull
work, but the sooner I get at it the sooner I'll get over it. Where is
Cheney now?"

"Up in his room. Hasn't come down to breakfast yet. Yes. There he is
now. Just getting out of the elevator--headed toward the dinin' room,"
and the plain-clothes man indicated the tall figure of a man about
forty, a man dressed in the height of fashion, with spats, a cane, and a
morning coat of the most correct cut. "Want me for anything?"

"Not a thing," said Randall, absently. "I'll pick him up now. You might
tell the chief to watch out for a hurry call from me--though I'm afraid
he won't get it."

As events proved, Randall was dead right. The Central Office heard
nothing from him for several months, and even Washington received only
stereotyped reports indicative of what Cheney was doing--which wasn't
much.

Shortly after the first of the year, Guy sent a wire to the chief,
asking to be relieved for a day or two in order that he might be free to
come to Washington. Sensing the fact that the operative had some plan
which he wished to discuss personally, the chief put another man on
Cheney's trail and instructed Randall to report at the Treasury
Department on the following morning.

"What's the matter?" inquired the man at the head of the Service as Guy,
a little thinner than formerly and showing by the wrinkles about his
eyes the strain under which he was working, strolled into the office.

"Nothing's the matter, Chief--and that's where the trouble lies. You
know I've never kicked about work, no matter how much of it I've had.
But this thing's beginning to get on my nerves. Cheney is planning some
coup. I'm dead certain of that. What it's all about, though, I haven't
the least idea. The plans are being laid in the German-American Club and
there's no chance of getting in there."

"How about bribing one of the employees to leave?"

"Can't be done. I've tried it--half a dozen times. They're all Germans
and, as such, in the organization. However, I have a plan. Strictly
speaking, it's outside the law, but that's why I wanted to talk things
over with you...."

When Randall had finished outlining his plan the chief sat for a moment
in thought. Then, "Are you sure you can put it over?" he inquired.

"Of course I can. It's done every other day, anyhow, by the cops
themselves. Why shouldn't we take a leaf out of their book?"

"I know. But there's always the possibility of a diplomatic protest."

"Not in this case, Chief. The man's only a waiter and, besides, before
the embassy has a chance to hear about it I'll have found out what I
want to know. Then, if they want to raise a row, let 'em."

The upshot of the matter was that, about a week later, Franz Heilman, a
waiter employed at the German-American Club in New York, was arrested
one night and haled into Night Court on a charge of carrying concealed
weapons--a serious offense under the Sullivan Act. In vain he protested
that he had never carried a pistol in his life. Patrolman Flaherty, who
had made the arrest, produced the weapon which he claimed to have found
in Heilman's possession and the prisoner was held for trial.

Bright and early the next morning Randall, disguised by a mustache which
he had trained for just such an occasion and bearing a carefully
falsified letter from a German brewer in Milwaukee, presented himself at
the employee's entrance of the German-American Club and asked for the
steward. To that individual he told his story--how he had tried to get
back to the Fatherland and had failed, how he had been out of work for
nearly a month, and how he would like to secure employment of some kind
at the Club where he would at least be among friends.

After a thorough examination of the credentials of the supposed
German--who had explained his accent by the statement that he had been
brought to the United States when very young and had been raised in
Wisconsin--the steward informed him that there was a temporary vacancy
in the Club staff which he could fill until Heilman returned.

"The duties," the steward added, "are very light and the pay, while not
large, will enable you to lay by a little something toward your return
trip to Germany."

Knowing that his time was limited, Randall determined to let nothing
stand in the way of his hearing all that went on in the room where
Cheney and his associates held their conferences. It was the work of
only a few moments to bore holes in the door which connected this room
with an unused coat closet--plugging up the holes with corks stained to
simulate the wood itself--and the instant the conference was on the new
waiter disappeared.

An hour later he slipped out of the side entrance to the Club and the
steward is probably wondering to this day what became of him. Had he
been able to listen in on the private wire which connected the New York
office of the Secret Service with headquarters at Washington, he would
have had the key to the mystery.

"Chief," reported Randall, "I've got the whole thing. There's a plot on
foot to raise one hundred and fifty thousand German reservists--men
already in this country--mobilizing them in four divisions, with six
sections. The first two divisions are to assemble at Silvercreek,
Michigan--the first one seizing the Welland Canal and the second
capturing Wind Mill Point, Ontario. The third is to meet at Wilson, N.
Y., and will march on Port Hope. The fourth will go from Watertown, N.
Y., to Kingston, Ontario, while the fifth will assemble somewhere near
Detroit and proceed toward Windsor. The sixth will stage an attack on
Ottawa, operating from Cornwall.

"They've got their plans all laid for the coup, and Cheney reported
to-day that he intends to purchase some eighty-five boats to carry the
invading force into the Dominion. The only thing that's delaying the
game is the question of provisions for the army. Cheney's holding out
for another advance--from what I gathered he's already received a
lot--and claims that he will be powerless unless he gets it. I didn't
stay to listen to the argument, for I figured that I'd better leave
while the leaving was good."

The reply that came back from Washington was rather startling to the
operative, who expected only commendation and the statement that his
task was completed.

"What evidence have you that this invasion is planned?"

"None besides what I heard through holes which I bored in one of the
doors of the German-American Club this morning."

"That won't stand in court! We don't dare to arrest this man Cheney on
that. You've got to get something on him."

"Plant it?"

"No! Get it straight. And we can't wait for this expedition to start,
either. That would be taking too much of a chance. It's up to you to do
a little speedy work in the research line. Dig back into the count's
past and find something on which we can hold him, for he's very
evidently the brains of the organization, in spite of the fact that he
probably is working only for what he can get of that fund that the
Germans have raised. I understand that it's sixteen million dollars and
that's enough to tempt better men than Cheney. Now go to it, and
remember--you've got to work fast!"

Disappointed, chagrined by the air of finality with which the receiver
at the Washington end of the line was hung up, Randall wandered out of
the New York office with a scowl on his face and deep lines of thought
between his eyes. If he hadn't been raised in the school which holds
that a man's only irretrievable mistake is to quit under fire, he'd have
thrown up his job right there and let some one else tackle the work of
landing the count. But he had to admit that the chief was right and,
besides, there was every reason to suppose that grave issues hung in the
balance. The invasion of Canada meant the overthrow of American
neutrality, the failure of the plans which the President and the State
Department had so carefully laid.

Cheney was the crux of the whole situation. Once held on a charge that
could be proved in court, the plot would fall through for want of a
capable leader--for the operative had learned enough during his hour in
the cloak-room to know that "the count" was the mainspring of the whole
movement, despite the fact that he undoubtedly expected to reap a rich
financial harvest for himself.

Selecting a seat on the top of a Fifth Avenue bus, Randall resigned
himself to a consideration of the problem.

"The whole thing," he figured, "simmers down to Cheney himself. In its
ramifications, of course, it's a question of peace or war--but in
reality it's a matter of landing a crook by legitimate means. I can't
plant a gun on him, like they did on Heilman, and there's mighty little
chance of connecting him with the Branchfield case or the van Husen
emeralds at this late date. His conduct around town has certainly been
blameless enough. Not even any women to speak of. Wait a minute, though!
There were two. The blond from the Knickerbocker and that red-haired
dame. He's still chasing around with the blond--but what's become of
Miss Red-head?"

This train of thought had possibilities. If the girl had been cast
aside, it was probable that she would have no objection to telling what
she knew--particularly as the color of her hair hinted at the possession
of what the owner would call "temperament," while the rest of the world
forgets to add the last syllable.

It didn't take long to locate the owner of the fiery tresses. A quick
round-up of the head waiters at the cafés which Cheney frequented, a
taxi trip to Washington Square and another to the section above Columbus
Circle, and Randall found that the red-haired beauty was known as Olga
Brainerd, an artist's model, whose face had appeared upon the cover of
practically every popular publication in the country. She had been out
of town for the past two months, he learned, but had just returned and
had taken an apartment in a section of the city which indicated the
possession of considerable capital.

"Miss Brainerd," said Randall, when he was face to face with the Titian
beauty in the drawing-room of her suite, "I came with a message from
your friend, Carl Cheney."

Here he paused and watched her expression very closely. As he had hoped,
the girl was unable to master her feelings. Rage and hate wrote
themselves large across her face and her voice fairly snapped as she
started to reply. Randall, however, interrupted her with a smile and the
statement:

"That's enough! I'm going to lay my cards face up on the table. I am a
Secret Service operative seeking information about Cheney. Here is my
badge, merely to prove that I'm telling the truth. We have reason to
believe that 'the Count,' as he is called, is mixed up with a pro-German
plot which, if successful, would imperil the peace of the country. Can
you tell us anything about him?"

"Can I?" echoed the girl. "The beast! He promised to marry me, more than
two months ago, and then got infatuated with some blond chit of a chorus
girl. Just because I lost my head and showed him a letter I had
received--a letter warning me against him--he flew into a rage and
threatened.... Well, never mind what he did say. The upshot of the
affair was that he sent me out of town and gave me enough money to last
me some time. But he'll pay for his insults!"

"Have you the letter you received?" asked Randall, casually--as if it
meant little to him whether the girl produced it or not.

"Yes. I kept it. Wait a moment and I'll get it for you." A few seconds
later she was back with a note, written in a feminine hand--a note which
read:

     If you are wise you will ask the man who calls himself Carl
     Cheney what he knows of Paul Weiss, of George Winters, and
     Oscar Stanley. You might also inquire what has become of
     Florence and Rose.

                                              (Signed) AMELIA.

Randall looked up with a puzzled expression. "What's all this about?" he
inquired. "Sounds like Greek to me."

"To me, too," agreed the girl. "But it was enough to make Carl purple
with rage and, what's more, to separate him from several thousand
dollars."

"Weiss, Winters, and Stanley," mused Guy. "Those might easily be
Cheney's former aliases. Florence, Rose, and Amelia? I wonder.... Come
on, girl, we're going to take a ride down to City Hall! I've got a
hunch!"

Late that afternoon when Carl Cheney arrived at his hotel he was
surprised to find a young man awaiting him in his apartment--a man who
appeared to be perfectly at ease and who slipped over and locked the
door once the count was safely within the room.

"What does this mean?" demanded Cheney. "By what right--"

"It means," snapped Randall, "that the game's up!" Then, raising his
voice, he called, "Mrs. Weiss!" and a tall woman parted the curtains at
the other end of the room; "Mrs. Winters!" and another woman entered;
"Mrs. Stanley!" and a third came in. With his fingers still caressing
the butt of the automatic which nestled in his coat pocket, Randall
continued:

"Cheney--or whatever your real name is--there won't be any invasion of
Canada. We know all about your plans--in fact, the arsenal on West
Houston Street is in possession of the police at this moment. It was a
good idea and undoubtedly you would have cleaned up on it--were it not
for the fact that I am under the far from painful necessity of arresting
you on a charge of bigamy--or would you call it 'trigamy'? The records
at City Hall gave you away, after one of these ladies had been kind
enough to provide us with a clue to the three aliases under which you
conducted your matrimonial operations.

"Come on, Count. The Germans may need you worse than we do--but we
happen to have you!"




XVI

AFTER SEVEN YEARS


Bill Quinn was disgusted. Some one, evidently afflicted with an
ingrowing sense of humor, had sent him the prospectus of a "school"
which professed to be able to teach budding aspirants the art of
becoming a successful detective for the sum of twenty-five dollars, and
Quinn couldn't appreciate the humor.

"_How to Become a Detective--in Ten Lessons_," he snorted. "It only
takes one for the man who's got the right stuff in him, and the man that
hasn't better stay out of the game altogether."

"Well," I retorted, anxious to stir up any kind of an argument that
might lead to one of Quinn's tales about the exploits of Uncle Sam's
sleuths, "just what does it take to make a detective?"

It was a moment or two before Quinn replied. Then: "There are only three
qualities necessary," he replied. "Common sense, the power of
observation, and perseverance. Given these three, with possibly a dash
of luck thrown in for good measure, and you'll have a crime expert who
could stand the heroes of fiction on their heads.

"Take Larry Simmons, for example. No one would ever have accused him of
having the qualifications of a detective--any more than they would have
suspected him of being one. But Larry drew a good-sized salary from the
Bureau of Pensions because he possessed the three qualities I mentioned.
He had the common sense of a physician, the observation of a trained
newspaper reporter, and the perseverance of a bulldog. Once he sunk his
teeth in a problem he never let loose--which was the reason that very
few people ever put anything over on the Pension Bureau as long as Larry
was on the job.

"That cap up there," and Quinn pointed to a stained and dilapidated bit
of headgear which hung upon the wall of his den, "is a memento of one of
Simmons's cases. The man who bought it would tell you that I'm dead
right when I say that Larry was persevering. That's putting it mildly."

       *       *       *       *       *

Quite a while back [continued Quinn, picking up the thread of his story]
there was a man out in Saint Joseph, Missouri, named Dave Holden. No one
appeared to know where he came from and, as he conducted himself quietly
and didn't mix in with his neighbors' affairs, no one cared very much.

Holden hadn't been in town more than a couple of weeks when one of the
older inhabitants happened to inquire if he were any kin to "Old Dave
Holden," who had died only a year or two before.

"No," said Holden, "I don't believe I am. My folks all came from Ohio
and I understand that this Holden was a Missourian."

"That's right," agreed the other, "and a queer character, too. Guess he
was pretty nigh the only man that fought on the Union side in the Civil
War that didn't stick th' government for a pension. Had it comin' to
him, too, 'cause he was a captain when th' war ended. But he always said
he didn't consider that Uncle Sam owed him anything for doin' his duty.
Spite of th' protests of his friends, Dave wouldn't ever sign a pension
blank, either."

A few more questions, carefully directed, gave Holden the history of his
namesake, and that night he lay awake trying to figure out whether the
plan which had popped into his head was safe. It promised some easy
money, but there was the element of risk to be considered.

"After all," he concluded, "I won't be doing anything that isn't
strictly within the law. My name is David Holden--just as the old man's
was. The worst that they can do is to turn down the application. I won't
be committing forgery or anything of the kind. And maybe it'll slip
through--which would mean a pile of money, because they'll kick in with
all that accumulated during the past fifty years."

So it was that, in the course of time, an application was filed at the
Bureau of Pensions in Washington for a pension due "David Holden" of
Saint Joseph, Missouri, who had fought in the Civil War with the rank of
captain. But, when the application had been sent over to the War
Department so that it might be compared with the records on file there,
it came back with the red-inked notation that "Capt. David Holden had
died two years before"--giving the precise date of his demise as
evidence.

The moment that the document reached the desk of the Supervisor of
Pensions he pressed one of the little pearl buttons in front of him and
asked that Larry Simmons be sent in. When Larry arrived the chief handed
him the application without a word.

"Right! I'll look into this," said Larry, folding the paper and slipping
it into the pocket of his coat.

"Look into it?" echoed the supervisor. "You'll do more than that! You'll
locate this man Holden--or whatever his right name is--and see that he
gets all that's coming to him. There've been too many of these cases
lately. Apparently people think that all they have to do is to file an
application for a pension and then go off and spend the money. Catch the
first train for Saint Joe and wire me when you've landed your man. The
district attorney will attend to the rest of the matter."

The location of David Holden, as Simmons found, was not the simplest of
jobs. The pension applicant, being comparatively a newcomer, was not
well known in town, and Simmons finally had to fall back upon the
expedient of watching the post-office box which Holden had given as his
address, framing a dummy letter so that the suspect might not think that
he was being watched.

Holden, however, had rented the box for the sole purpose of receiving
mail from the Pension Bureau. He had given the number to no one else and
the fact that the box contained what appeared to be an advertisement
from a clothing store made him stop and wonder. By that time, however,
Simmons had him well in sight and followed him to the boarding-house on
the outskirts of the town where he was staying.

That evening, while he was still wondering at the enterprise of a store
that could obtain a post-office box number from a government bureau at
Washington, the solution of the mystery came to him in a decidedly
unexpected manner. The house in which Holden was staying was
old-fashioned, one of the kind that are heated, theoretically at least,
by "registers," open gratings in the wall. Holden's room was directly
over the parlor on the first floor and the shaft which carried the hot
air made an excellent sound-transmitter.

It so happened that Simmons, after having made a number of inquiries
around town about the original Dave Holden, called at the boarding
house that night to discover what the landlady knew about the other man
of the same name, who was seated in the room above.

Suddenly, like a voice from nowhere, came the statement in a
high-pitched feminine voice: "I really don't know anything about him at
all. Mr. Holden came here about six weeks ago and asked me to take him
in to board. He seemed to be a very nice, quiet gentleman, who was
willing to pay his rent in advance. So I let him have one of the best
rooms in the house."

At the mention of his name Holden listened intently. Who was inquiring
about him, and why?

There was only a confused mumble--apparently a man's reply, pitched in a
low tone--and then the voice of the landlady again came clearly through
the register:

"Oh, I'm sure he wouldn't do anything like that. Mr. Holden is...."

But that was all that the pension applicant waited for. Moving with the
rapidity of a frightened animal, he secured one or two articles of value
from his dresser, crammed a hat into his pocket, slipped on a raincoat,
and vaulted out of the window, alighting on the sloping roof of a shed
just below. Before he had quitted the room, however, he had caught the
words "arrest on a charge of attempting to obtain money under false
pretenses."

Some two minutes later there was a knock on his door and a voice
demanded admittance. There was no reply. Again the demand, followed by a
rattling of the doorknob and a tentative shake of the door. In all, it
was probably less than five minutes after Larry Simmons had entered the
parlor before he had burst in the door of Holden's room. But the bird
had flown and the open window pointed to the direction of his flight.

Unfortunately for the operative the night was dark and the fugitive was
decidedly more familiar with the surrounding country than Larry was. By
the time he had secured the assistance of the police half an hour had
elapsed, and there weren't even any telltale footprints to show in which
direction the missing man had gone.

"See that men are placed so as to guard the railroad station," Simmons
directed, "and pass the word up and down the line that a medium-sized
man, about thirty-five years of age, with black hair and a rather ruddy
complexion--a man wanted by the government on a charge of false
pretenses--is trying to make his escape. If anyone reports him, let me
know at once."

That, under the circumstances, was really all that Larry could do. It
ought to be an easy matter to locate the fugitive, he figured, and it
would only be a question of a few days before he was safely in jail.

Bright and early the next morning the operative was awakened by a
bell-boy who informed him that the chief of police would like to see
him.

"Show him in," said Larry, fully expecting to see the chief enter with a
handcuffed prisoner. But the head of the police force came in alone,
carrying a bundle, which he gravely presented to Simmons.

"What's this?" inquired the pension agent.

"All that's left of your friend Holden," was the reply. "One of my men
reported late last night that he had heard a splash in the river as
though some one had jumped off the wharf, but he couldn't find out
anything more. To tell the truth, he didn't look very hard--because we
had our hands full with a robbery of Green's clothing store. Some one
broke in there and--"

"Yes--but what about Holden?" Simmons interrupted.

"Guess you'll have to drag the river for him," answered the chief. "We
found his coat and vest and raincoat on the dock this mornin', and on
top of them was this note, addressed to you."

The note, as Larry found an instant later, read:

     I'd rather die in the river than go to jail. Tell your boss
     that he can pay two pensions now--one for each of the Dave
     Holdens.

The signature, almost illegible, was that of "David Holden (Number
two)."

"No doubt that your man heard the splash when Holden went overboard last
night?" inquired the operative.

"Not the least in the world. He told me about it, but I didn't connect
it with the man you were after, and, besides, I was too busy right then
to give it much thought."

"Any chance of recovering the body?"

"Mighty little at this time of the year. The current's good and strong
an' the chances are that he won't turn up this side of the Mississippi,
if then. It was only by accident that we found his cap. It had lodged
under the dock and we fished it out less 'n half an hour ago--" and the
chief pointed to a water-soaked piece of cloth which Simmons recognized
as the one which Holden had been wearing the evening before.

"Well, I don't suppose there's anything more that we can do," admitted
Larry. "I'd like to have the river dragged as much as possible, though I
agree with you that the chances for recovering the body are very slim.
Will you look after that?"

"Sure I will, and anything else you want done." The chief was nothing if
not obliging--a fact which Simmons incorporated in his official report,
which he filed a few days later, a report which stated that "David
Holden, wanted on a charge of attempting to obtain money under false
pretenses, had committed suicide by drowning rather than submit to
arrest."

     The body has not been recovered [the report admitted], but
     this is not to be considered unusual at this time of the year
     when the current is very strong. The note left by the
     fugitive is attached.

Back from Washington came the wire:

     Better luck next time. Anyhow, Holden won't bother us again.

If this were a moving picture [Quinn continued, after a pause], there
would be a subtitle here announcing the fact that seven years are
supposed to elapse. There also probably would be a highly decorated
explanatory title informing the audience that "Uncle Sam Never Forgets
Nor Forgives"--a fact that is so perfectly true that it's a marvel that
people persist in trying to beat the government. Then the scene of the
film would shift to Seattle, Washington.

They would have to cut back a little to make it clear that Larry Simmons
had, in the meantime, left the Pension Bureau and entered the employment
of the Post-office Department, being desirous of a little more
excitement and a few more thrills than his former job afforded. But he
was still working for Uncle Sam, and his memory--like that of his
employer--was long and tenacious.

One of the minor cases which had been bothering the department for some
time past was that of a ring of fortune-tellers who, securing
information in devious ways, would pretend that it had come to them from
the spirit world and use it for purposes which closely approximated
blackmail. Simmons, being in San Francisco at the time, was ordered to
proceed to Seattle and look into the matter.

Posing as a gentleman of leisure with plenty of money and but little
care as to the way in which he spent it, it wasn't long before he was
steered into what appeared to be the very center of the ring--the
residence of a Madame Ahara, who professed to be able to read the stars,
commune with spirits, and otherwise obtain information of an occult
type. There Larry went through all the usual stages--palmistry,
spiritualism, and clairvoyance--and chuckled when he found, after his
third visit, that his pocket had been picked of a letter purporting to
contain the facts about an escapade in which he had been mixed up a few
years ago. The letter, of course, was a plant placed there for the sole
purpose of providing a lead for madame and her associates to follow. And
they weren't long in taking the tip.

The very next afternoon the government agent received a telephone call
notifying him that madame had some news of great importance which she
desired to impart--information which had come to her from the other
world and in which she felt certain he would be interested.

Larry asked if he might bring a friend with him, but the request--as he
had expected--was promptly refused. The would-be blackmailers were too
clever to allow first-hand evidence to be produced against them. They
wished to deal only with principals or, as madame informed him over the
phone, "the message was of such a nature that only he should hear it."

"Very well," replied Simmons, "I'll be there at eleven this evening."

It was not his purpose to force the issue at this time. In fact, he
planned to submit to the first demand for money and trust to the
confidence which this would inspire to render the blackmailers less
cautious in the future. But something occurred which upset the entire
scheme and, for a time at least, threatened disaster to the Post-office
schemes.

Thinking that it might be well to look the ground over before dark,
Larry strolled out to Madame Ahara's about five o'clock in the afternoon
and took up his position on the opposite side of the street, studying
the house from every angle. While he was standing there a man came
out--a man who was dressed in the height of fashion, but whose face was
somehow vaguely familiar. The tightly waxed mustache and the iron-gray
goatee seemed out of place, for Simmons felt that the last time he had
seen the man he had been clean shaven.

"Where was it?" he thought, as he kept the man in sight, though on the
opposite side of the street. "New York? No. Washington? Hardly. Saint
Louis? No, it was somewhere where he was wearing a cap--a cap that was
water-stained and ... I've got it! In Saint Joseph! The man who
committed suicide the night I went to arrest him for attempting to
defraud the Pension Bureau! It's he, sure as shooting!"

But just as Simmons started to cross the street the traffic cop raised
his arm, and when the apparently interminable stream of machines had
passed, the man with the mustache was nowhere to be seen. He had
probably slipped into one of the near-by office buildings. But which?
That was a question which worried Larry for a moment or two. Then he
came to the conclusion that there was no sense in trying to find his man
at this moment. The very fact that he was in Seattle was enough. The
police could find him with little difficulty.

But what had Holden been doing at the clairvoyant's? Had he fallen into
the power of the ring or was it possible that he was one of the
blackmailers himself?

The more Larry thought about the matter, the more he came to the
conclusion that here was an opportunity to kill two birds with a single
stone--to drive home at least the entering wedge of the campaign against
the clairvoyants and at the same time to land the man who had eluded him
seven years before.

The plan which he finally evolved was daring, but he realized that the
element of time was essential. Holden must not be given another
opportunity to slip through the net.

That night when Larry kept his appointment at madame's he saw to it that
a cordon of police was thrown around the entire block, with instructions
to allow no one to leave until after a prearranged signal.

"Don't prevent anyone from coming into the house," Simmons directed,
"but see that not a soul gets away from it. Also, you might be on the
lookout for trouble. The crowd's apt to get nasty and we can't afford to
take chances with them."

A tall dark-skinned man, attired in an Arabian burnoose and wearing a
turban, answered the ring at the door, precisely as Larry
anticipated--for the stage was always well set to impress visitors.
Madame herself never appeared in the richly decorated room where the
crystal-gazing séances were held, preferring to remain in the background
and to allow a girl, who went by the name of Yvette, to handle visitors,
the explanation being that "Madame receives the spirit messages and
transmits them to Yvette, her assistant."

Simmons therefore knew that, instead of dealing with an older and
presumably more experienced woman, he would only have to handle a girl,
and it was upon this that he placed his principal reliance.

Everything went along strictly according to schedule. Yvette, seated on
the opposite side of a large crystal ball in which she read strange
messages from the other world--visions transmitted from the cellar by
means of a cleverly constructed series of mirrors--told the operative
everything that had been outlined in the letter taken from his pocket on
the preceding night, adding additional touches founded on facts which
Larry had been "careless" enough to let slip during his previous visits.
Then she concluded with a very thinly veiled threat of blackmail if the
visitor did not care to kick in with a certain sum of money.

Larry listened to the whole palaver in silence, but his eyes were busy
trying to pierce the dim light in which the room was shrouded. So far as
he could see, the door through which he had entered formed the only
means of getting into the room--but there were a number of rugs and
draperies upon the walls, any one of which might easily mask a doorway.

When the girl had finished, the operative leaned forward and hitched his
chair around so that he could speak in a whisper.

"If you know what's good for you," he cautioned, "don't move! I've got
you covered, in the first place, and, secondly, there's a solid cordon
of police around this house! Careful--not a sound! I'm not after you. I
want the people who're behind you. Madame and her associates. This
blackmailing game has gone about far enough, but I'll see that you get
off with a suspended sentence if you do as I tell you. If not--" and the
very abruptness with which he stopped made the threat all the more
convincing.

"What--what do you want me to do?" stammered the girl, her voice barely
audible.

"Turn state's evidence and tip me off to everyone who's in on this
thing," was Larry's reply, couched in the lowest of tones. "There's not
a chance of escape for any of you, so you might as well do it and get it
over with. Besides that, I want to know where I can find a man with a
waxed mustache and iron-gray goatee who left this house at ten minutes
past five this afternoon."

"Madame!" exclaimed the girl. "Davidson!"

"Yes--Madame and Davidson, if that's the name he goes by now. It was
Holden the last time I saw him."

"He"--and the girl's voice was a mere breath--"he is madame!"

"What?"

"Yes, there is no Madame Ahara. Davidson runs the whole thing. He is--"

But at that moment one of the rugs on the wall which Larry was facing
swung outward and a man sprang into the room, a man whose face was
purple with rage and who leaped sidewise as he saw Larry's hand snap an
automatic into view above the pedestal on which the crystal ball
reposed. In a flash Simmons recognized two things--his danger and the
fact that the man who had just entered was Holden, alias Davidson,
blackmailer and potential thief.

Before the government agent had time to aim the head of the clairvoyant
ring fired. But his bullet, instead of striking Larry, shattered the
crystal ball into fragments and the room was plunged into total
darkness. In spite of the fact that he knew the shot would bring speedy
relief from outside the house, Simmons determined to capture his man
single-handed and alive. Half-leaping, half-falling from the chair in
which he had been seated, the operative sprang forward in an attempt to
nail his man while the latter was still dazed by the darkness. But his
foot, catching in one of the thick rugs which carpeted the floor,
tripped him and he fell--a bullet from the other's revolver plowing
through the fleshy part of his arm.

The flash, however, showed him the position of his adversary, and it was
the work of only a moment to slip forward and seize the blackmailer
around the waist, his right hand gripping the man's wrist and forcing it
upward so that he was powerless to use his revolver. For a full minute
they wrestled in the inky darkness, oblivious to the fact that the sound
of blows on the outer door indicated the arrival of reinforcements.

Then suddenly Larry let go of the blackmailer's arm and, whirling him
rapidly around, secured a half nelson that threatened to dislocate his
neck.

"Drop it!" he snarled. "Drop that gun before I wring your head off!" and
the muffled thud as the revolver struck the floor was the signal that
Holden had surrendered. A moment later the light in the center of the
room was snapped on and the police sergeant inquired if Larry needed any
assistance.

"No," replied Simmons, grimly, "but you might lend me a pair of
bracelets. This bird got away from me once, some seven years ago, and
I'm not taking any more chances!"




XVII

THE POISON-PEN PUZZLE


Beside the bookcase in the room which Bill Quinn likes to dignify by the
name of "library"--though it's only a den, ornamented with relics of
scores of cases in which members of the different government detective
services have figured--hangs a frame containing four letters, each in a
different handwriting.

Beyond the fact that these letters obviously refer to some secret in the
lives of the persons to whom they are addressed, there is little about
them that is out of the ordinary. A close observer, however, would note
that in none of the four is the secret openly stated. It is only hinted
at, suggested, but by that very fact it becomes more mysterious and
alarming.

It was upon this that I commented one evening as I sat, discussing
things in general, with Quinn.

"Yes," he agreed, "the writer of those letters was certainly a genius.
As an author or as an advertising writer or in almost any other
profession where a mastery of words and the ability to leave much to the
imagination is a distinct asset, they would have made a big success."

"They?" I inquired. "Did more than one person write the letters?"

"Don't look like the writing of the same person, do they?" countered
Quinn. "Besides, that was one of the many phases of the matter which
puzzled Elmer Allison, and raised the case above the dead level of
ordinary blackmailing schemes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Allison [Quinn went on, settling comfortably back in his big armchair]
was, as you probably remember, one of the star men of the Postal
Inspection Service, the chap who solved the mystery of the lost one
hundred thousand dollars in Columbus. In fact, he had barely cleared up
the tangle connected with the letters when assigned to look into the
affair of the missing money, with what results you already know.

The poison-pen puzzle, as it came to be known in the department, first
bobbed up some six months before Allison tackled it. At least, that was
when it came to the attention of the Postal Inspection Service. It's
more than likely that the letters had been arriving for some time
previous to that, because one of the beauties of any blackmailing
scheme--such as this one appeared to be--is that 90 per cent of the
victims fear to bring the matter to the attention of the law. They much
prefer to suffer in silence, kicking in with the amounts demanded, than
to risk the exposure of their family skeletons by appealing to the
proper authorities.

A man by the name of Tyson, who lived in Madison, Wisconsin, was the
first to complain. He informed the postmaster in his city that his wife
had received two letters, apparently in a feminine handwriting, which he
considered to be very thinly veiled attempts at blackmailing.

Neither of the letters was long. Just a sentence or two. But their
ingenuity lay in what they suggested rather than in their actual
threats.

The first one read:

     Does your husband know the details of that trip to Fond du
     Lac? He might be interested in what Hastings has to tell him.

The second, which arrived some ten days later, announced:

     The photograph of the register of a certain hotel in Fond du
     Lac for June 8 might be of interest to your husband--who can
     tell?

That was all there was to them, but it doesn't take an expert in plot
building to think of a dozen stories that could lie back of that
supposedly clandestine trip on the eighth of June.

Tyson didn't go into particulars at the time. He contented himself with
turning the letters over to the department, with the request that the
matter be looked into at once. Said that his wife had handed them to him
and that he knew nothing more about the matter.

All that the postal authorities could do at the time was to instruct him
to bring in any subsequent communications. But, as the letters stopped
suddenly and Tyson absolutely refused to state whether he knew of anyone
who might be interested in causing trouble between his wife and himself,
there was nothing further to be done. Tracing a single letter, or even
two of them, is like looking for a certain star on a clear night--you've
got to know where to look before you have a chance of finding it--and
the postmark on the letters wasn't of the least assistance.

Some three or four weeks later a similar case cropped up. This time it
was a woman who brought in the letters--a woman who was red-eyed from
lack of sleep and worry. Again the communications referred to a definite
escapade, but still they made no open demand for money.

By the time the third case cropped up the postal authorities in Madison
were appealing to Washington for assistance. Before Bolton and Clarke,
the two inspectors originally assigned to the case, could reach the
Wisconsin capital another set of the mysterious communications had been
received and called to the attention of the department.

During the three months which followed no less than six complaints were
filed, all of them alleging the receipt of veiled threats, and neither
the local authorities nor the men from Washington could find a single
nail on which to hang a theory. Finally affairs reached such a stage
that the chief sent for Allison, who had already made something of a
name for himself, and told him to get on the job.

"Better make the first train for Madison," were the directions which
Elmer received. "So far as we can tell, this appears to be the scheme of
some crazy woman, intent upon causing domestic disturbances, rather than
a well-laid blackmailing plot. There's no report of any actual demand
for money. Just threats or suggestions of revelations which would cause
family dissension. I don't have to tell you that it's wise to keep the
whole business away from the papers as long as you can. They'll get next
to it some time, of course, but if we can keep it quiet until we've
landed the author of the notes it'll be a whole lot better for the
reputation of the department.

"Bolton and Clarke are in Madison now, but their reports are far from
satisfactory, so you better do a little investigating of your own.
You'll have full authority to handle the case any way that you see fit.
All we ask is action--before somebody stirs up a real row about the
inefficiency of the Service and all that rot."

Elmer smiled grimly, knowing the difficulties under which the department
worked, difficulties which make it hard for any bureau to obtain the
full facts in a case without being pestered by politicians and harried
by local interests which are far from friendly. For this reason you
seldom know that Uncle Sam is conducting an investigation until the
whole thing is over and done with and the results are ready to be
presented to the grand jury. Premature publicity has ruined many cases
and prevented many a detective from landing the men he's after, which
was the reason that Allison slipped into town on rubber heels, and his
appearance at the office of the postmaster was the first indication that
official had of his arrival.

"Mr. Gordon," said Allison, after they had completed the usual
preliminaries connected with credentials and so forth, "I want to tackle
this case just as if I were the first man who had been called in. I
understand that comparatively little progress has been made--"

"'Comparatively little' is good," chuckled the postmaster.

"And I don't wish to be hindered by any erroneous theories which may
have been built up. So if you don't mind we'll run over the whole thing
from the beginning."

"Well," replied the postmaster, "you know about the Tyson letters and--"

"I don't know about a thing," Elmer cut in. "Or at least we'll work on
the assumption that I don't. Then I'll be sure not to miss any points
and at the same time I'll get a fresh outline of the entire situation."

Some two hours later Postmaster Gordon finished his résumé of the
various cases which were puzzling the police and the postal officials,
for a number of the best men on the police force had been quietly at
work trying to trace the poison-pen letters.

"Are these all the letters that have been received?" Allison inquired,
indicating some thirty communications which lay before him on the desk.

"All that have been called to the attention of this office. Of course,
there's no telling how many more have been written, about which no
complaint has been made. Knowing human nature, I should say that at
least three times that number have been received and possibly paid for.
But the recipients didn't report the matter--for reasons best known to
themselves. As a matter of fact--But you're not interested in gossip."

"I most certainly am!" declared Allison. "When you're handling a matter
of this kind, where back-stairs intrigue and servants-hall talk is
likely to play a large part, gossip forms a most important factor. What
does Dame Rumor say in this case?"

"So far as these letters are concerned, nothing at all. Certain
influences, which it's hardly necessary to explain in detail, have kept
this affair out of the papers--but gossip has it that at least three
divorces within as many months have been caused by the receipt of
anonymous letters, and that there are a number of other homes which are
on the verge of being broken up for a similar reason."

"That would appear to bear out your contention that other people have
received letters like these, but preferred to take private action upon
them. Also that, if blackmail were attempted, it sometimes
failed--otherwise the matter wouldn't have gotten as far as the divorce
court."

Then, after a careful study of several of the sample letters on the
desk, Allison continued, "I suppose you have noted the fact that no two
of these appear to have been written by the same person?"

"Yes, but that is a point upon which handwriting experts fail to agree.
Some of them claim that each was written by a different person. Others
maintain that one woman was responsible for all of them, and a third
school holds that either two or three people wrote them. What're you
going to do when experts disagree?"

"Don't worry about any of 'em," retorted Allison. "If we're successful
at all we won't have much trouble in proving our case without the
assistance of a bunch of so-called experts who only gum up the testimony
with long words that a jury can't understand. Where are the envelopes in
which these letters were mailed?"

"Most of the people who brought them in failed to keep the envelopes.
But we did manage to dig up a few. Here they are," and the postmaster
tossed over a packet of about half a dozen, of various shapes and sizes.

"Hum!" mused the postal operative, "all comparatively inexpensive
stationery. Might have been bought at nearly any corner drug store. Any
clue in the postmarks?"

"Not the slightest. As you will note, they were mailed either at the
central post office or at the railroad station--places so public that
it's impossible to keep a strict watch for the person who mailed 'em. In
one case--that of the Osgoods--we cautioned the wife to say nothing
whatever about the matter, and then ordered every clerk in the post
office to look out for letters in that handwriting which might be
slipped through the slot. In fact, we closed all the slots save one and
placed a man on guard inside night and day."

"Well, what happened?" inquired Allison, a trifle impatiently, as the
postmaster paused.

"The joke was on us. Some two days later a letter which looked
suspiciously like these was mailed. Our man caught it in time to dart
outside and nail the person who posted it. Fortunately we discovered
that she was Mrs. Osgood's sister-in-law and that the letter was a
perfectly innocent one."

"No chance of her being mixed up in the affair?"

"No. Her husband is a prominent lawyer here, and, besides, we've watched
every move she's made since that time. She's one of the few people in
town that we're certain of."

"Yet, you say her handwriting was similar to that which appears on these
letters?"

"Yes, that's one of the many puzzling phases of the whole matter. Every
single letter is written in a hand which closely resembles that of a
relative of the person to whom it is addressed! So much so, in fact,
that at least four of the complainants have insisted upon the arrest of
these relatives, and have been distinctly displeased at our refusal to
place them in jail merely because their handwriting is similar to that
of a blackmailer."

"Why do you say blackmailer? Do you know of any demand for money which
has been made?"

"Not directly--but what other purpose could a person have than to
extract money? They'd hardly run the risk of going to the pen in order
to gratify a whim for causing trouble."

"How about the Tysons and the Osgoods and the other people who brought
these letters in--didn't they receive subsequent demands for money?"

"They received nothing--not another single letter of any kind."

"You mean that the simple fact of making a report to your office
appeared to stop the receipt of the threats."

"Precisely. Now that you put it that way, it does look odd. But that's
what happened."

Allison whistled. This was the first ray of light that had penetrated a
very dark and mysterious case, and, with its aid, he felt that he might,
after all, be successful.

Contenting himself with a few more questions, including the names of
the couples whom gossip stated had been separated through the receipt of
anonymous communications, Allison bundled the letters together and
slipped them into his pocket.

"It's quite possible," he stated, as he opened the door leading out of
the postmaster's private office, "that you won't hear anything more from
me for some time. I hardly think it would be wise to report here too
often, or that if you happen to run into me on the street that you would
register recognition. I won't be using the name of Allison, anyhow, but
that of Gregg--Alvin Gregg--who has made a fortune in the operation of
chain stores and is looking over the field with a view to establishing
connections here. Gregg, by the way, is stopping at the Majestic Hotel,
if you care to reach him," and with that he was gone.

Allison's first move after establishing his identity at the hotel, was
to send a wire to a certain Alice Norcross in Chicago--a wire which
informed her that "My sister, Mrs. Mabel Kennedy, requests your presence
in Madison, Wisconsin. Urgent and immediate." The signature was "Alvin
Gregg, E. A.," and to an inquisitive telegraph operator who inquired the
meaning of the initials, Allison replied: "Electrical Assistant, of
course," and walked away before the matter could be further discussed.

The next evening Mrs. Mabel Kennedy registered at the Majestic Hotel,
and went up to the room which Mr. Gregg had reserved for her--the one
next to his.

"It's all right, Alice," he informed her a few moments later, after a
careful survey had satisfied him that the hall was clear of prying ears.
"I told them all about you--that you were my sister 'n' everything. So
it's quite respectable."

"Mrs. Kennedy," or Alice Norcross, as she was known to the members of
the Postal Service whom she had assisted on more than one occasion when
the services of a woman with brains were demanded, merely smiled and
continued to fix her hair before the mirror.

"I'm not worrying about that," she replied. "You boys can always be
trusted to arrange the details--but traveling always did play the
dickens with my hair! What's the idea, anyhow? Why am I Mrs. Mabel
Kennedy, and what's she supposed to do?"

In a few words Allison outlined what he was up against--evidently the
operation of a very skillful gang of blackmailers who were not only
perfectly sure of their facts, but who didn't run any risks until their
victims were too thoroughly cowed to offer any resistance.

"The only weak spot in the whole plan," concluded the operative, "is
that the letters invariably cease when the prospective victims lay their
case before the postmaster."

"You mean that you think he's implicated?"

"No--but some one in his office is!" snapped Allison. "Else how would
they know when to lay off? That's the only lead we have, and I don't
want to work from it, but up to it. Do you know anyone who's socially
prominent in Madison?"

"Not a soul, but it's no trick to get letters of introduction--even for
Mrs. Mabel Kennedy."

"Fine! Go to it! The minute you get 'em start a social campaign here.
Stage several luncheons, bridge parties, and the like. Be sure to create
the impression of a woman of means--and if you can drop a few hints
about your none too spotless past, so much the better."

"You want to draw their fire, eh?"

"Precisely. It's unfortunate that we can't rig up a husband for
you--that would make things easier, but when it's known that I, Alvin
Gregg, am your brother, I think it's more than likely that they'll risk
a couple of shots."

It was about a month later that Mrs. Kennedy called up her brother at
the Hotel Majestic and asked him to come over to her apartment at once.

"Something stirring?" inquired Allison as he entered the drawing-room of
the suite which his assistant had rented in order to bolster up her
social campaign.

"The first nibble," replied the girl, holding out a sheet of
violet-tinted paper, on which appeared the words:

     Of course your brother and your friends know all about the
     night you spent alone with a certain man in a cabin in the
     Sierras?

"Great Scott!" ejaculated Allison. "Do you mean to say it worked?"

"Like clockwork," was the girl's reply. "Acting on your instructions, I
made a special play for Snaith, the postmaster's confidential secretary
and general assistant. I invited him to several of my parties and paid
particular attention to what I said when he was around. The first night
I got off some clever little remark about conventions--laughing at the
fact that it was all right for a woman to spend a day with a man, but
hardly respectable for her to spend the evening. The next time he was
there--and he was the only one in the party who had been present on the
previous occasion--I turned the conversation to snowstorms and admitted
that I had once been trapped in a storm in the Sierra Nevadas and had
been forced to spend the night in a cabin. But I didn't say anything
then about any companion. The third evening--when an entirely different
crowd, with the exception of Snaith, was present--some one brought up
the subject of what constitutes a gentleman, and my contribution was a
speech to the effect that 'one never knows what a man is until he is
placed in a position where his brute instincts would naturally come to
the front.'

"Not a single one of those remarks was incriminating or even
suspicious--but it didn't take a master mind to add them together and
make this note! Snaith was the only man who could add them, because he
was the only one who was present when they were all made!"

"Fine work!" applauded Allison. "But there's one point you've
overlooked. This letter, unlike the rest of its kind, is postmarked
Kansas City, while Snaith was here day before yesterday when this was
mailed. I know, because Clarke's been camping on his trail for the past
three weeks."

"Then that means--"

"That Snaith is only one of the gang--the stool-pigeon--or, in this
case, the lounge-lizard--who collects the information and passes it on
to his chief? Exactly. Now, having Mr. Snaith where I want him and
knowing pretty well how to deal with his breed, I think the rest will be
easy. I knew that somebody in the postmaster's office must be mixed up
in the affair and your very astute friend was the most likely prospect.
Congratulations on landing him so neatly!"

"Thanks," said the girl, "but what next?"

"For you, not a thing. You've handled your part to perfection. The rest
is likely to entail a considerable amount of strong-arm work, and I'd
rather not have you around. Might cramp my style."

That night--or, rather, about three o'clock on the following
morning--Sylvester Snaith, confidential secretary to the postmaster of
Madison, was awakened by the sound of some one moving stealthily about
the bedroom of his bachelor apartment. Before he could utter a sound
the beam of light from an electric torch blazed in his eyes and a curt
voice from the darkness ordered him to put up his hands. Then:

"What do you know about the anonymous letters which have been sent to a
number of persons in this city?" demanded the voice.

"Not--not a thing," stammered the clerk, trying to collect his badly
scattered senses.

"That's a lie! We know that you supplied the information upon which
those letters were based! Now come through with the whole dope or, by
hell I'll--" the blue-steel muzzle of an automatic which was visible
just outside the path of light from the torch completed the threat.
Snaith, thoroughly cowed, "came through"--told more than even Allison
had hoped for when he had planned the night raid on a man whom he had
sized up as a physical coward.

Less than an hour after the secretary had finished, Elmer was on his way
to Kansas City, armed with information which he proceeded to lay before
the chief of police.

"'Spencerian Peter,' eh?" grunted the chief. "Sure, I know where to lay
my hands on him--been watching him more or less ever since he got out of
Leavenworth a couple of years back. But I never connected him with this
case."

"What do you mean--this case?" demanded Allison. "Did you know anything
about the poison-pen letters in Madison?"

"Madison? No--but I know about the ones that have set certain people
here by the ears for the past month. I thought that was what you wanted
him for. Evidently the game isn't new."

"Far from it," Elmer replied. "I don't know how much he cleaned up in
Wisconsin, but I'll bet he got away with a nice pile. Had a social pet
there, who happened to be the postmaster's right-hand man, collect the
scandal for him and then he'd fix up the letters--faking some relative's
handwriting with that infernal skill of his. Then his Man Friday would
tip him off when they made a holler to headquarters and he'd look for
other suckers rather than run the risk of getting the department on his
trail by playing the same fish too long. That's what finally gave him
away--that and the fact that his assistant was bluffed by an electric
torch and an empty gun."

"Well, I'll be hanged," muttered the chief. "You might have been
explaining the situation here--except that we don't know who his society
informant is. I think we better drop in for a call on 'Spencerian' this
evening."

       *       *       *       *       *

"The call was made on scheduled time," Quinn concluded, "but it was
hardly of a social nature. You wouldn't expect a post-office operative,
a chief of police, and half a dozen cops to stage a pink tea. Their
methods are inclined to be a trifle more abrupt--though Pete, as it
happened, didn't attempt to pull any rough stuff. He dropped his gun the
moment he saw how many guests were present, and it wasn't very long
before they presented him with a formal invitation to resume his none
too comfortable but extremely exclusive apartment in Leavenworth.
Snaith, being only an accomplice, got off with two years. The man who
wrote the letters and who was the principal beneficiary of the money
which they produced, drew ten."

"And who got the credit for solving the puzzle?" I inquired. "Allison or
the Norcross girl?"

"Allison," replied Quinn. "Alice Norcross only worked on condition that
her connection with the Service be kept quite as much of a secret as
the fact that her real name was Mrs. Elmer Allison."

"What? She was Allison's wife?" I demanded.

"Quite so," said the former operative. "If you don't believe me, there's
a piece of her wedding dress draped over that picture up there," and he
pointed to a strip of white silk that hung over one of the framed
photographs on the wall.

"But I thought you said--"

"That that was part of the famous thirty thousand yards which was nailed
just after it had been smuggled across the Canadian border? I did. But
Allison got hold of a piece of it and had it made up into a dress for
Alice. So that bit up there has a double story. You know one of them.
Remind me to tell you the other sometime."




XVIII

THIRTY THOUSAND YARDS OF SILK


"I'd sure like to lead the life of one of those fictional detective
heroes," muttered Bill Quinn, formerly of the United States Secret
Service, as he tossed aside the latest volume of crime stories that had
come to his attention. "Nothing to do but trail murderers and find the
person who lifted the diamond necklace and stuff of that kind. They
never have a case that isn't interesting or, for that matter, one in
which they aren't successful. Must be a great life!"

"But aren't the detective stories of real life interesting and
oftentimes exciting?" I inquired, adding that those which Quinn had
already told me indicated that the career of a government operative was
far from being deadly monotonous.

"Some of them are," he admitted, "but many of them drag along for months
or even years, sometimes petering out for pure lack of evidence. Those,
of course, are the cases you never hear of--the ones where Uncle Sam's
men fall down on the job. Oh yes, they're fallible, all right. They
can't solve every case--any more than a doctor can save the life of
every patient he attends. But their percentage, though high, doesn't
approach the success of your Sherlock Holmeses and your Thinking
Machines, your Gryces and Sweetwaters and Lecoqs."

"How is it, then, that every story you've told dealt with the success
of a government agent--never with his failure?"

Quinn smiled reminiscently for a moment.

Then, "What do doctors do with their mistakes?" he asked. "They bury
'em. And that's what any real detective will do--try to forget, except
for hoping that some day he'll run up against the man who tricked him.
Again, most of the yarns I've told you revolved around some of the
relics of this room"--waving his hand to indicate the walls of his
library--"and these are all mementoes of successful cases. There's no
use in keeping the other kind. Failures are too common and brains too
scarce. That bit of silk up there--"

"Oh yes," I interrupted, "the one that formed part of Alice Norcross's
wedding dress."

"And figured in one of the most sensational plots to defraud the
government that was ever uncovered," added Quinn. "If Ezra Marks hadn't
located that shipment I wouldn't have had that piece of silk and there
wouldn't be any story to tell. So you see, it's really a circle, after
all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Marks [Quinn went on] was one of the few men connected with any branch
of the government organizations who really lived up to the press-agent
notices of the detectives you read about. In the first place, he looked
like he might have stepped out of a book--big and long-legged and lanky.
A typical Yankee, with all of the New-Englander's shrewdness and common
sense. If you turned Ezra loose on a case you could be sure that he
wouldn't sit down and try to work it out by deduction. Neither would he
plunge in and attempt by sheer bravado and gun play to put the thing
over. He'd mix the two methods and, more often than not, come back with
the answer.

Then, too, Marks had the very happy faculty of drawing assignments that
turned out to be interesting. Maybe it was luck, but more than likely it
was because he followed plans that made 'em so--preferring to wait until
he had all the strings to a case and then stage a big round-up of the
people implicated. You remember the case of the Englishman who smuggled
uncut diamonds in the bowl of his pipe and the one you wrote under the
title of "Wah Lee and the Flower of Heaven"? Well, those were typical of
Ezra's methods--the first was almost entirely analytical, the second
mainly gun play plus a painstaking survey of the field he had to cover.

But when Marks was notified that it was up to him to find out who was
running big shipments of valuable silks across the Canadian border,
without the formality of visiting the customhouse and making the
customary payments, he found it advisable to combine the two courses.

It was through a wholesale dealer in silks in Seattle, Washington, that
the Customs Service first learned of the arrival of a considerable
quantity of this valuable merchandise, offered through certain
underground channels at a price which clearly labeled it as smuggled.
Possibly the dealer was peeved because he didn't learn of the shipment
in time to secure any of it. But his reasons for calling the affair to
the attention of the Treasury Department don't really matter. The main
idea was that the silk was there, that it hadn't paid duty, and that
some one ought to find out how it happened.

When a second and then a third shipment was reported, Marks was notified
by wire to get to Seattle as fast as he could, and there to confer with
the Collector of the Port.

It wasn't until after he had arrived that Ezra knew what the trouble
was, for the story of the smuggled silk hadn't penetrated as far south
as San Francisco, where he had been engaged in trying to find a cargo of
smuggled coolies.

"Here's a sample of the silk," announced the Collector of the Port at
Seattle, producing a piece of very heavy material, evidently of foreign
manufacture. "Beyond the fact that we've spotted three of the shipments
and know where to lay our hands on them if wanted, I've got to admit
that we don't know a thing about the case. The department, of course,
doesn't want us to trace the silk from this end. The minute you do that
you lay yourself open to all sorts of legal tangles and delays--to say
nothing of giving the other side plenty of time to frame up a case that
would sound mighty good in court. Besides, I haven't enough men to
handle the job in the short space of time necessary. So you'll have to
dig into it and find out who got the stuff in and how. Then we'll attend
to the fences who've been handling it here."

"The old game of passing the buck," thought Ezra, as he fingered the
sample of silk meditatively. "I'll do the work and they'll get the
glory. Oh, well--"

"Any idea of where the shipments came from?" he inquired.

"There's no doubt but that it's of Japanese manufacture, which, of
course, would appear to point to a shipping conspiracy of some nature.
But I hardly think that's true here. Already eighteen bolts of silk have
been reported in Seattle, and, as you know, that's a pretty good sized
consignment. You couldn't stuff 'em into a pill box or carry 'em inside
a walking stick, like you could diamonds. Whoever's handling this job is
doing it across the border, rather than via the shipping route."

"No chance of a slip-up in your information, is there, Chief?" Ezra
inquired, anxiously. "I'd hate to start combing the border and then
find that the stuff was being slipped in through the port."

"No," and the Collector of Customs was positive in his reply. "I'm not
taking a chance on that tip. I know what I'm talking about. My men have
been watching the shipping like hawks. Ever since that consignment of
antique ivory got through last year we've gone over every vessel with a
microscope, probing the mattresses and even pawing around in the coal
bins. I'm positive that there isn't a place big enough to conceal a yard
of silk that the boys haven't looked into--to say nothing of eighteen
bolts.

"Besides," added the Collector, "the arrival of the silk hasn't
coincided with the arrival of any of the ships from Japan--not by any
stretch of the imagination."

"All right, I'll take up the trail northward then," replied Marks.
"Don't be surprised if you fail to hear from me for a couple of months
or more. If Washington inquires, tell them that I'm up on the border
somewhere and let it go at that."

"Going to take anybody with you?"

"Not a soul, except maybe a guide that I'll pick up when I need him. If
there is a concerted movement to ship silk across the line--and it
appears that there is--the more men you have working with you the less
chance there is for success. Border runners are like moonshiners,
they're not afraid of one man, but if they see a posse they run for
cover and keep out of sight until the storm blows over. And there isn't
one chance in a thousand of finding 'em meanwhile. You've got to play
them, just like you would a fish, so the next time you hear from me you
will know that I've either landed my sharks or that they've slipped off
the hook!"

It was about a month later that the little town of Northport, up in the
extreme northeastern corner of Washington, awoke to find a stranger in
its midst. Strangers were something of a novelty in Northport, and this
one--a man named Marks, who stated that he was "prospectin' for some
good lumber"--caused quite a bit of talk for a day or two. Then the town
gossips discovered that he was not working in the interest of a large
company, as had been rumored, but solely on his own hook, so they left
him severely alone. Besides, it was the height of the logging season and
there was too much work to be done along the Columbia River to worry
about strangers.

Marks hadn't taken this into consideration when he neared the eastern
part of the state, but he was just as well pleased. If logs and logging
served to center the attention of the natives elsewhere, so much the
better. It would give him greater opportunity for observation and
possibly the chance to pick up some information. Up to this time his
trip along the border had been singularly uneventful and lacking in
results. In fact, it was practically a toss-up with him whether he would
continue on into Idaho and Montana, on the hope that he would find
something there, or go back to Seattle and start fresh.

However, he figured that it wouldn't do any harm to spend a week or two
in the neighborhood of the Columbia--and, as events turned out, it was a
very wise move.

Partly out of curiosity and partly because it was in keeping with his
self-assumed character of lumber prospector, Marks made a point of
joining the gangs of men who worked all day and sometimes long into the
night keeping the river clear of log jams and otherwise assisting in the
movement of timber downstream. Like everyone who views these operations
for the first time, he marveled at the dexterity of the loggers who
perched upon the treacherous slippery trunks with as little thought for
danger as if they had been crossing a country road. But their years of
familiarity with the current and the logs themselves had given them a
sense of balance which appeared to inure them to peril.

Nor was this ability to ride logs confined wholly to the men. Some of
the girls from the near-by country often worked in with the men,
handling the lighter jobs and attending to details which did not call
for the possession of a great amount of strength.

One of these, Marks noted, was particularly proficient in her work.
Apparently there wasn't a man in Northport who could give her points in
log riding, and the very fact that she was small and wiry provided her
with a distinct advantage over men who were twice her weight. Apart from
her grace and beauty, there was something extremely appealing about the
girl, and Ezra found himself watching her time after time as she almost
danced across the swirling, bark-covered trunks--hardly seeming to touch
them as she moved.

The girl was by no means oblivious of the stranger's interest in her
ability to handle at least a part of the men's work. She caught his eye
the very first day he came down to the river, and after that, whenever
she noted that he was present she seemed to take a new delight in
skipping lightly from log to log, lingering on each just long enough to
cause it to spin dangerously and then leaping to the next.

But one afternoon she tried the trick once too often. Either she
miscalculated her distance or a sudden swirl of the current carried the
log for which she was aiming out of her path, for her foot just touched
it, slipped and, before she could recover her balance, she was in the
water--surrounded by logs that threatened to crush the life out of her
at any moment.

Startled by her cry for help, three of the lumbermen started toward
her--but the river, like a thing alive, appeared to thwart their efforts
by opening up a rift in the jam on either side, leaving a gap too wide
to be leaped, and a current too strong to be risked by men who were
hampered by their heavy hobnailed shoes.

Marks, who had been watching the girl, had his coat off almost as soon
as she hit the water. An instant later he had discarded his shoes and
had plunged in, breasting the river with long overhand strokes that
carried him forward at an almost unbelievable speed. Before the men on
the logs knew what was happening, the operative was beside the girl,
using one hand to keep her head above water, and the other to fend off
the logs which were closing in from every side.

"Quick!" he called. "A rope! A--" but the trunk of a tree, striking his
head a glancing blow, cut short his cry and forced him to devote every
atom of his strength to remaining afloat until assistance arrived. After
an interval which appeared to be measured in hours, rather than seconds,
a rope splashed within reach and the pair were hauled to safety.

The girl, apparently unhurt by her drenching, shook herself like a wet
spaniel and then turned to where Marks was seated, trying to recover his
breath.

"Thanks," she said, extending her hand. "I don't know who you are,
stranger, but you're a man!"

"It wasn't anything to make a fuss about," returned Ezra, rising and
turning suspiciously red around the ears, for it was the first time that
a girl had spoken to him in that way for more years than he cared to
remember. Then, with the Vermont drawl that always came to the surface
when he was excited or embarrassed, he added: "It was worth gettin' wet
to have you speak like that."

This time it was the girl who flushed, and, with a palpable effort to
cover her confusion, she turned away, stopping to call back over her
shoulder, "If you'll come up to dad's place to-night I'll see that
you're properly thanked."

"Dad's place?" repeated Ezra to one of the men near by. "Where's that?"

"She means her stepfather's house up the river," replied the lumberman.
"You can't miss it. Just this side the border. Ask anybody where Old Man
Petersen lives."

Though the directions were rather vague, Marks started "up the river"
shortly before sunset, and found but little difficulty in locating the
big house--half bungalow and half cabin--where Petersen and his
stepdaughter resided, in company with half a dozen foremen of lumber
gangs, and an Indian woman who had acted as nurse and chaperon and cook
and general servant ever since the death of the girl's mother a number
of years before.

While he was still stumbling along, trying to pierce the gloom which
settled almost instantly after sunset, Marks was startled to see a white
figure rise suddenly before him and to hear a feminine voice remark, "I
wondered if you'd come."

"Didn't you know I would?" replied Ezra. "Your spill in the river had me
scared stiff for a moment, but it was a mighty lucky accident for me."

At the girl's suggestion they seated themselves outside, being joined
before long by Petersen himself, who, with more than a trace of his
Slavic ancestry apparent in his voice, thanked Marks for rescuing his
daughter. It was when the older man left them and the girl's figure was
outlined with startling distinctness by the light from the open door,
that Ezra received a shock which brought him to earth with a crash.

In the semidarkness he had been merely aware that the girl was wearing a
dress which he would have characterized as "something white." But once
he saw her standing in the center of the path of light which streamed
from the interior of the house there could be no mistake.

The dress was of white silk!

More than that, it was made from material which Marks would have sworn
had been cut from the same bolt as the sample which the Collector had
shown him in Seattle!

"What's the matter, Mr. Marks?" inquired the girl, evidently noting the
surprise which Ezra was unable completely to suppress. "Seen a ghost or
something?"

"I thought for a moment I had," was the operative's reply, as he played
for time. "It must be your dress. My--my sister had one just like it
once."

"It is rather pretty, isn't it? In spite of the fact that I made it
myself--out of some silk that dad--that dad brought home."

Ezra thought it best to change the subject, and as soon as he could find
the opportunity said good night, with a promise to be on hand the next
day to see that the plunge in the river wasn't repeated.

But the next morning he kept as far away from the girl--Fay Petersen--as
he could, without appearing to make a point of the matter. He had
thought the whole thing over from every angle and his conclusion was
always the same. The Petersens were either hand in glove with the gang
that was running the silk across the border or they were doing the
smuggling themselves. The lonely cabin, the proximity to the border, the
air of restraint which he had noted the previous evening (based
principally upon the fact that he had not been invited indoors), the
silk dress--all were signs which pointed at least to a knowledge of the
plot to beat the customs.

More than that, when Marks commenced to make some guarded inquiries
about the family of the girl whom he had saved from drowning, he met
with a decidedly cool reception.

"Old Man Petersen has some big loggin' interests in these parts,"
declared the most loquacious of his informants, "an' they say he's made
a pile o' money in the last few months. Some say it's timber an' others
say it's--well, it ain't nobody's concern how a man makes a livin' in
these parts, s'long as he behaves himself."

"Isn't Petersen behaving himself?" asked Ezra.

"Stranger," was the reply, "it ain't always healthy to pry into another
man's affairs. Better be satisfied with goin' to see the girl. That's
more than anybody around here's allowed to do."

"So there was an air of mystery about the Petersen house, after all!"
Marks thought. It hadn't been his imagination or an idea founded solely
upon the sight of the silk dress!

The next fortnight found the operative a constant and apparently a
welcome visitor at the house up the river. But, hint as he might, he was
never asked indoors--a fact that made him all the more determined to see
what was going on. While he solaced himself with the thought that his
visits were made strictly in the line of duty, that his only purpose was
to discover Petersen's connection with the smuggled silk, Ezra was
unable entirely to stifle another feeling--something which he hadn't
known since the old days in Vermont, when the announcement of a girl's
wedding to another man had caused him to leave home and seek his
fortunes in Boston.

Fay Petersen was pretty. There was no denying that fact. Also she was
very evidently prepossessed in favor of the man who had saved her from
the river. But this fact, instead of soothing Marks's conscience, only
irritated it the more. Here he was on the verge of making love to a
girl--really in love with her, as he admitted to himself--and at the
same time planning and hoping to send her stepfather to the
penitentiary. He had hoped that the fact that Petersen was not her own
father might make things a little easier for him, but the girl had shown
in a number of ways that she was just as fond of her foster-parent as
she would have been of her own.

"He's all the daddy I ever knew," she said one night, "and if anything
ever happened to him I think it would drive me crazy," which fell far
short of easing Ezra's mind, though it strengthened his determination to
settle the matter definitely.

The next evening that he visited the Petersens he left a little earlier
than usual, and only followed the road back to Northport sufficiently
far to make certain that he was not being trailed. Then retracing his
steps, he approached the house from the rear, his soft moccasins moving
silently across the ground, his figure crouched until he appeared little
more than a shadow between the trees.

Just as he reached the clearing which separated the dwelling from the
woods, he stumbled and almost fell. His foot had caught against
something which felt like the trunk of a fallen tree, but which moved
with an ease entirely foreign to a log of that size.

Puzzled, Marks waited until a cloud which had concealed the moon had
drifted by, and then commenced his examination. Yes, it was a log--and a
big one, still damp from its immersion in the river. But it was so light
that he could lift it unaided and it rang to a rap from his knuckles.
The end which he first examined was solid, but at the other end the log
was a mere shell, not more than an inch of wood remaining inside the
bark.

It was not until he discovered a round plug of wood--a stopper, which
fitted precisely into the open end of the log--that the solution of the
whole mystery dawned upon him. The silk had been shipped across the
border from Canada inside the trunks of trees, hollowed out for the
purpose! Wrapping the bolts in oiled silk would keep them perfectly
waterproof and the plan was so simple as to be impervious to detection,
save by accident.

Emboldened by his discovery, Marks slipped silently across the cleared
space to the shadow of the house, and thence around to the side, where a
few cautious cuts of his bowie knife opened a peep hole in the shutter
which covered the window. Through this he saw what he had hoped for, yet
feared to find--Petersen and three of his men packing bolts of white
silk in boxes for reshipment. What was more, he caught snatches of their
conversation which told him that another consignment of the smuggled
goods was due from Trail, just across the border, within the week.

Retreating as noiselessly as he had come, Marks made his way back to
Northport, where he wrote two letters--or, rather, a letter and a note.
The first, addressed to the sheriff, directed that personage to collect
a posse and report to Ezra Marks, of the Customs Service, on the second
day following. This was forwarded by special messenger, but Marks
pocketed the note and slipped it cautiously under the door of the
Petersen house the next evening.

"It's a fifty-fifty split," he consoled his conscience. "The government
gets the silk and the Petersens get their warning. I don't suppose I'll
get anything but the devil for not landing them!"

The next morning when the sheriff and his posse arrived they found, only
an empty house, but in the main room were piled boxes containing no less
than thirty thousand yards of white silk--valued at something over one
hundred thousand dollars. On top of the boxes was an envelope addressed
to Ezra Marks, Esq., and within it a note which read, "I don't know who
you are, Mr. Customs Officer, but you're a man!"

There was no signature, but the writing was distinctly feminine.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And was that all Marks ever heard from her?" I asked, when Quinn
paused.

"So far as I know," said the former operative. "Of course, Washington
never heard about that part of the case. They were too well satisfied
with Ezra's haul and the incoming cargo, which they also landed, to care
much about the Petersens. So the whole thing was entered on Marks's
record precisely as he had figured it--a fifty-fifty split. You see,
even government agents aren't always completely successful--especially
when they're fighting Cupid as well as crooks!"




XIX

THE CLUE IN THE CLASSIFIED COLUMN


Quinn tossed his evening paper aside with a gesture in which disgust was
mingled in equal proportion with annoyance.

"Why is it," he inquired, testily, "that some fools never learn
anything?"

"Possibly that's because they're fools," I suggested. "What's the
trouble now?"

"Look at that!" And the former Secret Service operative recovered the
paper long enough to indicate a short news item near the bottom of the
first page--an item which bore the headline, "New Fifty-Dollar
Counterfeit Discovered."

"Yes," I agreed, "there always are people foolish enough to change bills
without examining them any too closely. But possibly this one is very
cleverly faked."

"Fools not to examine them!" echoed Quinn. "That isn't the direction in
which the idiocy lies. The fools are the people who think they can
counterfeit Uncle Sam's currency and get away with it. Barnum must have
been right. There's a sucker born every minute--and those that don't try
to beat the ponies or buck the stock market turn to counterfeiting for a
living. They get it, too, in Leavenworth or Atlanta or some other place
that maintains a federal penitentiary.

"They never seem to learn anything by others' experience, either. You'd
think, after the Thurene case, it would be perfectly apparent that no
one could beat the counterfeiting game for long."

"The Thurene case? I don't seem to remember that. The name is unusual,
but--"

"Yes, and that wasn't the only part of the affair that was out of the
ordinary," Quinn cut in. "Spencer Graham also contributed some work that
was well off the beaten path--not forgetting the assistance rendered by
a certain young woman."

       *       *       *       *       *

Probably the most remarkable portion of the case [continued Quinn] was
the fact that Graham didn't get in on it until Thurene had been
arrested. Nevertheless, if it hadn't been for his work in breaking
through an ironclad alibi the government might have been left high and
dry, with a trunkful of suspicions and mighty little else.

Somewhere around the latter part of August the New York branch of the
Secret Service informed Washington that a remarkably clever counterfeit
fifty-dollar bill had turned up in Albany--a bill in which the engraving
was practically perfect and the only thing missing from the paper was
the silk fiber. This, however, was replaced by tiny red and blue lines,
drawn in indelible ink. The finished product was so exceptionally good
that, if it had not been for the lynxlike eyes of a paying teller--plus
the highly developed sense of touch which bank officials accumulate--the
note would have been changed without a moment's hesitation.

The man who presented it, who happened to be well known to the bank
officials, was informed that the bill was counterfeit and the matter was
reported through the usual channels. A few days later another bill,
evidently from the same batch, was picked up in Syracuse, and from that
time on it rained counterfeits so hard that every teller in the state
threw a fit whenever a fifty-dollar bill came in, either for deposit or
for change.

Hardly had the flow of upstate counterfeits lessened than the bills
began to make their appearance in and around New York, sometimes in
banks, but more often in the resorts patronized by bookmakers from
Jamaica and the other near-by race tracks.

The significance of this fact didn't strike the Secret Service men
assigned to the case until the horses had moved southward. The instant
one of the bills was reported in Baltimore two operatives were ordered
to haunt the _pari-mutuel_ booths at Pimlico, with instructions to pay
particular attention to the windows where the larger wagers were laid.
An expert in counterfeits also took up his position inside the cage, to
signal the men outside as soon as a phony bill was presented.

It was during the rush of the betting after the two-year-olds had gone
to the post for the first race that the signal came--indicating that a
man about forty-five years of age, well dressed and well groomed, had
exchanged two of the counterfeits for a one hundred-dollar ticket on the
favorite.

Hollister and Sheehan, the Secret Service men, took no chances with
their prey. Neither did they run the risk of arresting him prematurely.
Figuring that it was well within the realms of possibility that he had
received the bills in exchange for other money, and that he was
therefore ignorant of the fact that they were spurious, they contented
themselves with keeping close to him during the race and the interval
which followed.

When the favorite won, the man they were watching cashed his bet and
stowed his winnings away in a trousers pocket. Then, after a prolonged
examination of the jockeys, the past performances and the weights of
the various horses, he made his way back to the window to place another
bet.

Again the signal--and this time Hollister and Sheehan closed in on their
man, notifying him that he was under arrest and advising him to come
along without creating any disturbance.

"Arrest for what?" he demanded.

"Passing counterfeit money," replied Hollister, flashing his badge.
Then, as the man started to protest, Sheehan counseled him to reserve
his arguments until later, and the trio made their way out of the
inclosure in silence.

When searched, in Baltimore, two sums of money were found upon the
suspect--one roll in his left-hand trousers pocket being made up of
genuine currency, including that which he had received for picking the
winner of the first race, and the one in the right-hand pocket being
entirely of counterfeit fifty-dollar bills--forty-eight in number.

When questioned, the prisoner claimed that his name was Robert J.
Thurene of New Haven, and added that there were plenty of people in the
Connecticut city who would vouch for his respectability.

"Then why," inquired the chief of the Secret Service, who had come over
from Washington to take charge of the case, "do you happen to have two
thousand four hundred dollars in counterfeit money on you?"

At that moment Thurene dropped his bomb--or, rather, one of the many
which rendered the case far from monotonous.

"If you'll search my room at the Belvedere," he suggested, "you'll find
some five thousand dollars more."

"What?" demanded the chief. "Do you admit that you deliberately brought
seven thousand five hundred dollars of counterfeit money here and tried
to pass it?"

"I admit nothing," corrected the arrested man. "You stated that the
fifty-dollar bills which you found upon me when I was searched against
my will were false. I'll take your word for that. But if they are
counterfeit, I'm merely telling you that there are a hundred more like
them in my room at the hotel."

"Of course you're willing to state where they came from?" suggested the
chief, who was beginning to sense the fact that something underlay
Thurene's apparent sincerity.

"Certainly. I found them."

"Old stuff," sneered one of the operatives standing near by. "Not only
an old alibi, but one which you'll have a pretty hard time proving."

"Do you happen to have a copy of yesterday's _News_ handy?" Thurene
asked.

When the paper was produced he turned rapidly to the Lost and Found
column and pointed to an advertisement which appeared there:

     FOUND--An envelope containing a sum of money. Owner may
     recover same by notifying Robert J. Thurene, Belvedere Hotel,
     and proving property.

"There," he continued, after reading the advertisement aloud, "that is
the notice which I inserted after finding the money which you say is
counterfeit."

"Where did you find it?"

"In the Pennsylvania station, night before last. I had just come in from
New York, and chanced to see the envelope lying under one of the rows of
seats in the center of the waiting room. It attracted my attention, but
when I examined it I was amazed to find that it contained one hundred
and fifty fifty-dollar bills, all apparently brand new. Naturally, I
didn't care to part with the money unless I was certain that I was
giving it up to the rightful owner, so I carried it with me to the hotel
and advertised the loss at once.

"The next afternoon I went out to the track and found, when it was too
late, that the only money I had with me was that contained in the
envelope. I used a couple of the bills, won, and, being superstitious,
decided to continue betting with that money. That's the reason I used it
this afternoon. Come to think of it, you won't find the original five
thousand dollars in my room. Part of it is the money which I received at
the track and which I replaced in order to make up the sum I found. But
most of the bills are there."

"You said," remarked the chief, striking another tack, "that your name
is Thurene and that you live in New Haven. What business are you in?"

"Stationery. You'll find that my rating in Bradstreet's is excellent,
even though my capital may not be large. What's more"--and here the
man's voice became almost aggressive--"any bank in New Haven and any
member of the Chamber of Commerce will vouch for me. I've a record of
ten years there and some ten in Lowell, Mass., which will bear the
closest possible inspection."

And he was right, at that.

In the first place, a search of his room at the hotel brought to light a
large official envelope containing just the sum of money he had
mentioned, counterfeit bills and real ones. Secondly, a wire to New
Haven elicited the information that "Robert J. Thurene, answering to
description in inquiry received, has operated a successful stationery
store here for the past ten years. Financial standing excellent. Wide
circle of friends, all of whom vouch for his character and integrity."

When this wire was forwarded to Washington, the chief having returned
to headquarters, Spencer Graham received a hurry-up call to report in
the main office. There he was informed that he was to take charge of the
Thurene case and see what he could find out.

"I don't have to tell you," added the chief, "that it's rather a
delicate matter. Either the man is the victim of circumstances--in which
case we'll have to release him with profound apologies and begin all
over again--or he's a mighty clever crook. We can't afford to take any
chances. The case as it finally stands will have to be presented in
court, and, therefore, must be proof against the acid test of shrewd
lawyers for the defense, lawyers who will rely upon the newspaper
advertisement and Thurene's spotless record as indications of his
innocence."

"That being the case, Chief, why take any chances right now? The case
hasn't gotten into the papers, so why not release Thurene?"

"And keep him under constant surveillance? That wouldn't be a bad idea.
The moment he started to leave the country we could nab him, and
meanwhile we would have plenty of time to look into the matter. Of
course, there's always the danger of suicide--but that's proof of guilt,
and it would save the Service a lot of work in the long run. Good idea!
We'll do it."

So it was that Robert J. Thurene of New Haven was released from custody
with the apologies of the Secret Service--who retained the counterfeit
money, but returned the real bills--while Spencer Graham went to work on
the Baltimore end of the case, four operatives took up the job of
trailing the stationer, and Rita Clarke found that she had important
business to transact in Connecticut.

Anyone who didn't know Rita would never have suspected that, back of
her brown eyes lay a fund of information upon a score of
subjects--including stenography, the best methods of filing, cost
accounting, and many other points which rendered her invaluable around
an office. Even if they found this out, there was something else which
she kept strictly to herself--the fact that she was engaged to a
certain operative in the United States Secret Service, sometimes known
as Number Thirty-three, and sometimes as Spencer Graham.

In reply to Spencer's often-repeated requests that she set a day for
their wedding, Miss Clarke would answer: "And lose the chance to figure
in any more cases? Not so that you could notice it! As long as I'm
single you find that you can use me every now and then, but if I were
married I'd have too many domestic cares. No, Spencer, let's wait until
we get one more BIG case, and then--well, we'll say one month from the
day it's finished."

Which was the reason that Graham and his fiancée had a double reason for
wanting to bring Thurene to earth.

The first place that Graham went to in Baltimore was the Pennsylvania
station, where he made a number of extended inquiries of certain
employees there. After that he went to the newspaper office, where he
conferred with the clerk whose business it was to receive the lost and
found advertisements, finally securing a copy of the original notice in
Thurene's handwriting. Also some other information which he jotted down
in a notebook reserved for that purpose.

Several days spent in Baltimore failed to turn up any additional leads
and Graham returned to Washington with a request for a list of the
various places where counterfeit fifty-dollar bills had been reported
during the past month. The record sounded like the megaphonic call of a
train leaving Grand Central Station--New York, Yonkers, Poughkeepsie,
Syracuse, Troy, and points north, with a few other cities thrown in for
good measure. So Spencer informed the chief that he would make his
headquarters in New York for the next ten days or so, wired Rita to the
same effect, and left Washington on the midnight train.

In New York he discovered only what he had already known, plus one other
very significant bit of evidence--something which would have warranted
him in placing Thurene again under arrest had he not been waiting for
word from Rita. He knew that it would take her at least a month to work
up her end of the case, so Graham put in the intervening time in weaving
his net a little stronger, for he had determined that the next time the
New Haven stationer was taken into custody would be the last--that the
government would have a case which all the lawyers on earth couldn't
break.

Early in December he received a wire from Rita--a telegram which
contained the single word, "Come"--but that was enough. He was in New
Haven that night, and, in a quiet corner of the Taft grille the girl
gave him an account of what she had found.

"Getting into Thurene's store was the easiest part of the whole job,"
she admitted. "It took me less than a day to spot one of the girls who
wanted to get married, bribe her to leave, and then arrive bright and
early the following morning, in response to the 'stenographer wanted'
advertisement."

"Thurene's had a lot of practice writing ads lately," remarked Graham,
with a smile.

"What do you mean?"

"Nothing. Tell you later. What'd you find in the store?"

"Not a thing--until day before yesterday. I thought it best to move
slowly and let matters take their own course as far as possible. So I
contented myself with doing the work which had been handled by the girl
whose place I took--dictation, typing, and the rest. Then I found that
the correspondence files were in shocking shape. I grabbed the
opportunity to do a little night work by offering to bring them up to
date.

"'Certainly,' said the boss, and then took good care to be on hand when
I arrived after dinner that night. The very way he hung around and
watched every movement I made convinced me that the stuff was somewhere
on the premises. But where? That's what I couldn't figure out.

"Having demonstrated my ability by three hours of stiff work on the
files, I suggested a few days later that I had a first-hand knowledge of
cost accounting and that I would be glad to help get his books in shape
for the holiday business, the old man who usually attends to this being
sick. Again Thurene assented and again he blew in, 'to explain any
entries which might prove troublesome.' I'll say this for him,
though--there isn't a single incriminating entry on the books. Every
purchase is accounted for, down to the last paper of pins.

"Then, when I felt that I had wormed myself sufficiently well into his
good graces, I hinted that I might be able to help out by supervising
the system in the engraving department--checking up the purchases,
watching the disbursements, keeping an eye on the stock and so on.
Rather to my surprise, he didn't offer any objection. Said that my work
had been of so much help elsewhere that he would be glad to have me
watch the engravers' work.

"It was there that I got my first real lead--at least I hope it's a
lead. Back of the engraving department is a small room, locked and
padlocked, where the boss is supposed to ride his personal hobby of
amateur photography. I asked one of the men the reason for guarding a
dark room so carefully, and he replied that Thurene claimed to be on the
verge of making a great discovery in color photography, but that the
process took a long time and he didn't want to run the risk of having it
disturbed. I'm to have a look at his color process to-night."

"What?" cried Graham. "He's going to show you what is in the
double-locked room?"

"That's what he's promised to do. I haven't the least hope of seeing
anything incriminating--all the evidence will probably be well
hidden--but this morning I expressed a casual interest in photography
and remarked that I understood he was working on a new color process. I
did it mainly to see how he would react. But he never batted an eyelid.
'I've been making some interesting experiments recently,' he said, 'and
they ought to reach a climax to-night. If you'd care to see how they
turn out, suppose you meet me here at nine o'clock and we'll examine
them together.'"

"But Rita," Graham protested, "you don't mean to say that you're going
to put yourself entirely in this man's power?"

The girl's first answer was a laugh, and then, "What do you mean, 'put
myself in his power'?" she mocked. "You talk like the hero of a
melodrama. This isn't the first time that I've been alone in the store
with him after dark. Besides, he doesn't suspect a thing and it's too
good a chance to miss. Meet me here the first thing in the
morning--around eight-thirty--and I'll give you the details of Thurene's
secret chamber, provided it contains anything interesting."

"Rita, I can't--" Graham started to argue, but the girl cut in with,
"You can't stop me? No, you can't. What's more, I'll have to hurry. It's
ten minutes to nine now. See you in the morning."

The next thing Graham knew she had slipped away from the table and was
on her way out of the grille.

When Rita reached the Thurene establishment, promptly at nine, she found
the proprietor waiting for her.

"On time, as usual," he laughed. "Now you'd better keep your hat and
coat on. There's no heat in the dark room and I don't want you to catch
cold. The plates ought to be ready by this time. We'll go right down and
take a look at them."

Guided by the light from the lantern which the stationer held high in
the air, the girl started down the steps leading to the basement where
the engraving department was located. She heard Thurene close the door
behind him, but failed to hear him slip the bolt which, as they
afterward found, had been well oiled.

In fact, it was not until they had reached the center of the large room,
in one corner of which was the door to the private photographic
laboratory, that she knew anything was wrong. Then it was too late.

Before she could move, Thurene leaned forward and seized her--one arm
about her waist, the other over her mouth. Struggle as she might, Rita
was unable to move. Slowly, relentlessly, Thurene turned her around
until she faced him, and then, with a sudden movement of the arm that
encircled her waist, secured a wad of cotton waste, which he had
evidently prepared for just such an emergency. When he had crammed this
in the girl's mouth and tied her hands securely, he moved forward to
open the door to the dark room.

"Thought I was easy, didn't you?" he sneered. "Didn't think I'd see
through your scheme to get a position here and your infernal cleverness
with the books and the accounts? Want to see something of my color
process, eh? Well, you'll have an opportunity to study it at your
leisure, for it'll be twelve good hours before anyone comes down here,
and by that time I'll be where the rest of your crowd can't touch me."

"Come along! In with you!"

At that moment there was a crash of glass from somewhere near the
ceiling and something leaped into the room--something that took only two
strides to reach Thurene and back him up against the wall, with the
muzzle of a very businesslike automatic pressed into the pit of his
stomach.

The whole thing happened so quickly that by the time Rita recovered her
balance and turned around she only saw the stationer with his hands well
above his head and Spencer Graham--her Spencer--holding him up at the
point of a gun.

"Take this," snapped the operative, producing a penknife, "and cut that
girl's hands loose! No false moves now--or I'm likely to get nervous!"

A moment later Rita was free and Thurene had resumed his position
against the wall.

"Frisk him!" ordered Graham, and then, when the girl had produced a
miscellaneous collection of money, keys and jewelry from the man's
pockets, Spencer allowed him to drop his arms long enough to snap a pair
of handcuffs in place.

"This time," announced the Secret Service man, "you won't be released
merely because of a fake ad. and the testimony of your friends. Pretty
clever scheme, that. Inserting a 'found advertisement' to cover your
possession of counterfeit money in case you were caught. But you
overlooked a couple of points. The station in Baltimore was thoroughly
swept just five minutes before your train arrived from New York and
every man on duty there is ready to swear that he wouldn't have
overlooked anything as large as the envelope containing that phony
money. Then, too, the clerk in the _News_ office received your
advertisement shortly after noon the next day--so you didn't advertise
it 'at once,' as you said you did.

"But your biggest mistake was in playing the game too often.
Here"--producing a page from the classified section of a New York
newspaper--"is the duplicate of your Baltimore ad., inserted to cover
your tracks in case they caught you at Jamaica. I've got the original,
in your handwriting, in my pocket."

"But how'd you happen to arrive here at the right moment?" exclaimed
Rita.

"I wasn't any too well convinced that you'd fooled our friend here,"
Graham replied. "So I trailed you, and, attracted by the light from
Thurene's lantern, managed to break in that window at the time you
needed me."

"There's only one thing that puzzles me," the operative continued,
turning to Thurene. "What made you take up counterfeiting? Your business
record was clear enough before that, and, of course, being an engraver,
it wasn't hard for you to find the opportunity. What was the motive?"

For a full sixty seconds the man was silent and then, from between his
clenched teeth, came two words, "Wall Street."

"I might have guessed that," replied Graham. "I'll see you safely in
jail first and then have a look through your room. Want to come along,
Rita?"

"No, thanks, Spencer. I've had enough for one evening. Let's see. This
is the sixth of December. Suppose we plan a certain event for the sixth
of January?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"And so they were married and lived happily ever after?" I added, as
Quinn paused.

"And so they were married," he amended. "I can't say as to the rest of
it--though I'm inclined to believe that they were happy. Anyhow, Rita
knew when she had enough--and that's all you can really ask for in a
wife."




XX

IN THE SHADOW OF THE CAPITOL


"It won't be long until they're all back--with their pretty clothes and
their jeweled bags and their air of innocent sophistication--but until
at least a dozen of them gather here Washington won't be itself again."

Bill Quinn and I had been discussing the change which had come over
Washington since peace had disrupted the activities of the various war
organizations, and then, after a pause, the former member of the Secret
Service had referred to "them" and to "their pretty clothes."

"Who do you mean?" I inquired. "With the possible exception of some
prominent politicians I don't know anyone whose presence is essential to
make Washington 'itself again.' And certainly nobody ever accused
politicians, with the possible exception of J. Ham Lewis, of wearing
pretty clothes. Even he didn't carry a jeweled bag."

"I wasn't thinking of Congressmen or Senators or even members of the
Cabinet," replied Quinn with a smile. "Like the poor, they are always
with us, and also like the poor, there are times when we would willingly
dispense with them. But the others--they make life worth living,
particularly for members of the Secret Service, who are apt to be a bit
bored with the monotony of chasing counterfeiters and guarding the
President.

"The ones I refer to are the beautifully gowned women whose too perfect
English often betrays their foreign origin almost as certainly as would
a dialect. They are sent here by various governments abroad to find out
things which we would like to keep secret and their presence helps to
keep Washington cosmopolitan and--interesting.

"During the war--well, if you recall the case of Jimmy Callahan and the
electric sign at Norfolk--the affair which I believe you wrote under the
title of 'A Flash in the Night'--you know what happened to those who
were caught plotting against the government. In times of peace, however,
things are different."

"Why? Isn't a spy always a spy?"

"So far as their work is concerned they are. But by a sort of
international agreement, tacit but understood, those who seek to pry
into the affairs of other governments during the years of peace are not
treated with the same severity as when a nation is fighting for its
life."

"But surely we have no secrets that a foreign government would want!" I
protested. "That's one of the earmarks of a republic. Everything is
aired in the open, even dirty linen."

Quinn didn't answer for a moment, and when he did reply there was a
reminiscent little smile playing around the corners of his mouth.

"Do you remember the disappearance of the plans of the battleship
_Pennsylvania_?" he asked.

"Yes, I think I do. But as I recall it the matter was never cleared up."

"Officially, it wasn't. Unofficially, it was. At least there are several
persons connected with the United States Secret Service who are positive
that Sylvia Sterne lifted the blue prints and afterward--well, we might
as well begin the story at the first chapter."

       *       *       *       *       *

The name she was known by on this side of the Atlantic [continued the
former government agent] was not that of Sterne, though subsequent
investigations proved that that was what she was called in Paris and
Vienna and Rome and London. When she arrived in Washington her visiting
cards bore the name of the Countess Stefani, and as there are half a
dozen counts of that name to be found in the peerages of as many
principalities, no one inquired too deeply into her antecedents.

Yes, she admitted that there was a count somewhere in the background,
but she led those who were interested to the conclusion he had never
understood her peculiar temperament and that therefore she was
sojourning in Washington, seeking pleasure and nothing more. A slow,
soulful glance from her violet eyes usually accompanied the
statement--and caused the man to whom the statement was made (it was
always a man) to wonder how anyone could fail to appreciate so charming
a creature.

"Charming" is really a very good word to apply to the Countess Sylvia.
Her manner was charming and her work was likewise. Charming secrets and
invitations and news out of those with whom she came in contact.

Her first public appearance, so far as the Secret Service was concerned,
was at one of the receptions at the British embassy. She was there on
invitation, of course, but it was an invitation secured in her own
original way.

Immediately upon arriving in Washington she had secured an apartment at
Brickley Court, an apartment which chanced to be directly across the
hall from the one occupied by a Mrs. Sheldon, a young widow with a
rather large acquaintance in the diplomatic set.

Some ten days after the Countess Sylvia took up her residence on
Connecticut Avenue she visited one of the department stores and made
several purchases, ordering them sent C. O. D. to her apartment. Only,
instead of giving the number as four thirty-six, her tongue apparently
slipped and she said four thirty-seven, which was Mrs. Sheldon's number.
Of course, if the parcels had been paid for or charged they would have
been left at the desk in the lobby, but, being collect, the boy brought
them to the door of four thirty-seven.

As was only natural, Mrs. Sheldon was about to order them returned when
the door across the hall opened and the countess, attired in one of her
most fetching house gowns, appeared and explained the mistake.

"How stupid of me!" she exclaimed. "I must have given the girl the wrong
apartment number. I'm awfully sorry for troubling you, Mrs. Sheldon."

The widow, being young, could not restrain the look of surprise when her
name was mentioned by a woman who was an utter stranger, but the
countess cut right in with:

"You probably don't remember me, but we met two years ago on Derby Day
in London. The count and I had the pleasure of meeting you through Lord
Cartwright, but it was just before the big race, and when I looked
around again you had been swallowed up in the crowd."

Mrs. Sheldon had been at the Derby two years before, as the countess
doubtless knew before she arrived in Washington, and also she remembered
having met a number of persons during that eventful afternoon. So the
rest was easy for Sylvia, particularly as the first half hour of their
conversation uncovered the fact that they had many mutual friends, all
of whom, however, were in Europe.

Through Mrs. Sheldon the countess met a number of the younger and lesser
lights of the Diplomatic Corps and the invitation to the reception at
the British Embassy was hers for the suggestion.

Before the evening was over several men were asking themselves where
they had met that "very charming countess" before. Some thought it must
have been in Paris, others were certain that it was in Vienna, and still
others maintained that her face brought back memories of their detail in
Saint Petersburg (the name of the Russian capital had not then been
altered). Sylvia didn't enlighten any of them. Neither did she volunteer
details, save of the vaguest nature, contenting herself with knowing
glances which hinted much and bits of frothy gossip which conveyed
nothing. The beauty of her face and the delicate curves of her figure
did the rest. Before the evening was over she had met at least the
younger members of all the principal embassies and legations, not to
mention three men whose names appeared upon the roster of the Senate
Committee on Foreign Relations.

To one of these, Senator Lattimer, she paid particular attention,
assuring him that she would be honored if he would "drop in some
afternoon for tea," an invitation which the gentleman from Iowa accepted
with alacrity a few days later.

As was afterward apparent, the countess had arranged her schedule with
considerable care. She had arrived in Washington early in the fall, and
by the time the season was well under way she had the entrée to the
majority of the semiprivate functions--teas and receptions and dances to
which a number of guests were invited. Here, of course, she had an
opportunity to pick up a few morsels of information--crumbs which fell
from the tables of diplomacy--but that wasn't what she was after. She
wanted a copy of a certain confidential report referring to American
relations abroad, and, what's more, she'd have gotten it if she hadn't
overstepped herself.

Through what might have been termed in vulgar circles "pumping" Senator
Lattimer, though the countess's casual inquiries from time to time
evinced only a natural interest in the affairs of the world, Sylvia
found out that the report would be completed early in March and that a
copy would be in the Senator's office for at least two days--or, what
interested her more, two nights.

She didn't intimate that she would like to see it. That would have been
too crude. In fact, she deftly turned the subject and made the Senator
believe that she was interested only in his views with respect to the
stabilization of currency or some such topic far removed from the point
they had mentioned.

Just before he left, however, Senator Lattimer mentioned that there was
going to be a big display of fireworks around the Washington Monument
the following evening, and inquired if the countess would be interested
in witnessing the celebration.

"Surely," said she. "Why not let's watch them from the roof here? We
ought to able to get an excellent view."

"I've got a better idea than that," was the senatorial reply. "We'll go
down to the State, War, and Navy Building. The windows on the south side
ought to be ideal for that purpose and there won't be any trouble about
getting in. I'll see to that," he added, with just a touch of pomposity.

So it happened that among the dozen or more persons who occupied choice
seats in a room in the Navy Department that next night were the Hon.
Arthur H. Lattimer and the Countess Stefani.

The next morning it was discovered that plans relating to certain recent
naval improvements--radical changes which were to be incorporated in
the battleship _Pennsylvania_--were missing.

The chief learned of the loss about nine-thirty, and by ten o'clock
every available man was turned loose on the case, with instructions to
pry into the past records and watch the future actions of the people who
had been in the room on the previous evening.

Because he particularly requested it, Owen Williams, whose connection
with the Secret Service was not a matter of general information, was
detailed to learn what he could of the Countess Stefani.

"I've run into her a couple of times recently," he told the chief, "and
there's something not altogether on the level about the lady. I don't
suppose we have time to cable abroad and trace the particular branch of
the family to which she claims to belong, but I have a hunch that she is
not working altogether in the interest of Europe. A certain
yellow-skinned person whom we both know has been seen coming out of
Brickley Court on several occasions within the past month, and--well,
the countess is worth watching."

"Trail her, then!" snapped the chief. "The department has asked for
quick action in this case, for there are reasons which render it
inadvisable for those plans to get out of the country."

"Right!" replied Williams, settling his hat at a rather jaunty angle and
picking up his gloves and stick. "I'll keep in close touch with you and
report developments. If you want me within the next couple of hours I'll
probably be somewhere around Brickley Court. The countess never rises
until round noon."

But that morning, as Williams soon discovered, something appeared to
have interfered with the routine of the fair Sylvia. She had called the
office about nine o'clock, made an inquiry about the New York trains,
ordered a chair reserved on the eleven and a taxi for ten forty-five.
All of which gave Owen just enough time to phone the chief, tell him of
the sudden change in his plans, and suggest that the countess's room be
searched during her absence.

"Tell New York to have some one pick up Stefani as soon as she arrives,"
Williams concluded. "I'm going to renew my acquaintance with her en
route, find out where she's staying, and frame an excuse for being at
the same hotel. But I may not be able to accompany her there, so have
some one trail her from the station. I'll make any necessary reports
through the New York office."

Just after the train pulled out of Baltimore the Countess Stefani saw a
young and distinctly handsome man, whose face was vaguely familiar, rise
from his seat at the far end of the car and come toward her. Then, as he
reached her chair he halted, surprised.

"This is luck!" he exclaimed. "I never hoped to find you on the train,
Countess! Going through to New York, of course?"

As he spoke the man's name came back to her, together with the fact that
he had been pointed out as one of the eligible young bachelors who
apparently did but little and yet had plenty of money to do it with.

"Oh, Mr. Williams! You gave me a bit of a start at first. Your face was
in the shadow and I didn't recognize you. Yes, I'm just running up for a
little shopping. Won't be gone for more than a day or two, for I must be
back in time for the de Maury dance on Thursday evening. You are going,
I suppose?"

Thankful for the opening, Williams occupied the vacant chair next to
hers, and before they reached Havre de Grace they were deep in a
discussion of people and affairs in Washington. It was not Williams's
intention, however, to allow the matter to stop there. Delicately, but
certainly, he led the conversation into deeper channels, exerting every
ounce of his personality to convince the countess that this was a moment
for which he had longed, an opportunity to chat uninterruptedly with
"the most charming woman in Washington."

"This is certainly the shortest five hours I've ever spent," he assured
his companion as the porter announced their arrival at Manhattan
Transfer. "Can't I see something more of you while we are in New York?
I'm not certain when I'll get back to Washington and this glimpse has
been far too short. Are you going to stop with friends?"

"No--at the Vanderbilt. Suppose you call up to-morrow morning and I'll
see what I can do."

"Why not a theater party this evening?"

"I'm sorry, but I have an engagement."

"Right--to-morrow morning, then," and the operative said good-by with a
clear conscience, having noted that one of the men from the New York
office was already on the job.

Later in the evening he was informed that the countess had gone directly
to her hotel, had dressed for dinner, and then, after waiting in the
lobby for nearly an hour, had eaten a solitary meal and had gone back to
her room, leaving word at the desk that she was to be notified
immediately if anyone called. But no one had.

The next morning, instead of phoning, Williams dropped around to the
Vanderbilt and had a short session with the house detective, who had
already been notified that the Countess Stefani was being watched by
Secret Service operatives. The house man, however, verified the report
of the operative who had picked up the countess at the station--she had
received no callers and had seen no one save the maid.

"Any phone messages?"

"Not one."

"Any mail?"

"Just a newspaper, evidently one that a friend had mailed from
Washington. The address was in a feminine hand and--"

"Tell the maid that I want the wrapper of that paper if it's in the
countess's room," interrupted Williams. "I don't want the place searched
for it, but if it happens to be in the wastebasket be sure I get it."

A moment later he was calling the Countess Stefani, presumably from the
office of a friend of his in Wall Street.

"I'm afraid I can't see you to-day," and Sylvia's voice appeared to
register infinite regret. "I wasn't able to complete a little business
deal I had on last night--succumbed to temptation and went to the
theater, so I'll have to pay for it to-day." (Here Williams suppressed a
chuckle, both at the manner in which the lady handled the truth and at
the fact that she was palpably ignorant that she had been shadowed.)
"I'm returning to Washington on the Congressional, but I'll be sure to
see you at the de Maurys', won't I? Please come down--for my sake!"

"I'll do it," was Owen's reply, "and I can assure you that my return to
Washington will be entirely because I feel that I must see you again. Au
revoir, until Thursday night."

"On the Congressional Limited, eh?" he muttered as he stepped out of the
booth. "Maybe it's a stall, but I'll make the train just the same.
Evidently one of the lady's plans has gone amiss."

"Here's the wrapper you wanted," said the house detective, producing a
large torn envelope, slit lengthwise and still showing by its rounded
contour that it had been used to inclose a rolled newspaper.

"Thanks," replied Williams, as he glanced at the address. "I thought
so."

"Thought what?"

"Come over here a minute," and he steered the detective to the desk,
where he asked to be shown the register for the preceding day. Then,
pointing to the name "Countess Sylvia Stefani" on the hotel sheet and to
the same name on the wrapper, he asked, "Note everything?"

"The handwriting is the same!"

"Precisely. The countess mailed this paper herself at this hotel before
she left Washington. And, if I'm not very much mistaken, she'll mail
another one to herself in Washington, before she leaves New York."

"You want it intercepted?"

"I do not! If Sylvia is willing to trust the Post-office Department with
her secret, I certainly am. But I intend to be on hand when that paper
arrives."

Sure enough, just before leaving for the station that afternoon,
Williams found out from his ally at the Vanderbilt that the countess had
slipped a folded and addressed newspaper into the mail box in the lobby.
She had then paid her bill and entered a taxi, giving the chauffeur
instructions to drive slowly through Central Park. Sibert, the operative
who was trailing her, reported that several times she appeared to be on
the point of stopping, but had ordered the taxi driver to go
on--evidently being suspicious that she was followed and not wishing to
take any chances.

Of this, though, Williams knew nothing--for a glance into one of the
cars on the Congressional Limited had been sufficient to assure him that
his prey was aboard. He spent the rest of the trip in the smoker, so
that he might not run into her.

In Washington, however, a surprise awaited him.

Instead of returning at once to Brickley Court, the countess checked her
bag at the station and hired a car by the hour, instructing the driver
to take her to the Chevy Chase Club. Williams, of course, followed in
another car, but had the ill fortune to lose the first taxi in the crush
of machines which is always to be noted on dance nights at the club, and
it was well on toward morning before he could locate the chauffeur he
wanted to reach.

According to that individual, the lady had not gone into the club, at
all, but, changing her mind, had driven on out into the country,
returning to Washington at midnight.

"Did she meet anyone?" demanded Williams.

"Not a soul, sir. Said she just wanted to drive through the country and
that she had to be at the Senate Office Building at twelve o'clock."

"The Senate Office Building?" echoed the operative. "At midnight? Did
you drop her there?"

"I did, sir. She told me to wait and she was out again in five minutes,
using the little door in the basement--the one that's seldom locked. I
thought she was the wife of one of the Senators. Then I drove her to
Union Station to get her bag, and then to Brickley Court, where she paid
me and got out."

The moment the chauffeur had mentioned the Senate Office Building a
mental photograph of Senator Lattimer had sprung to Williams's mind, for
the affair between the countess and the Iowa statesman was public
property.

Telling the chauffeur to wait in the outer room, the operative called
the Lattimer home and insisted on speaking to the Senator.

"Yes, it's a matter of vital importance!" he snapped. Then, a few
moments later, when a gruff but sleepy voice inquired what he wanted:

"This is Williams of the Secret Service speaking, Senator. Have you any
documents of importance--international importance--in your office at the
present moment?"

"No, nothing of particular value. Wait a minute! A copy of a certain
report to the Committee on Foreign Relations arrived late yesterday and
I remember seeing it on my desk as I left. Why? What's the matter?"

"Nothing--except that I don't think that report is there now," replied
Williams. "Can you get to your office in ten minutes?"

"I'll be there!"

But a thorough search by the two of them failed to reveal any trace of
the document. It had gone--vanished--in spite of the fact that the door
was locked as usual.

"Senator," announced the government agent, "a certain woman you know
took that paper. She got in here with a false key, lifted the report and
was out again in less than five minutes. The theft occurred shortly
after midnight and--"

"If you know so much about it, why don't you arrest her?"

"I shall--before the hour is up. Only I thought you might like to know
in advance how your friend the Countess Stefani worked. She was also
responsible for the theft of the plans of the battleship _Pennsylvania_,
you know."

And Williams was out of the room before the look of amazement had faded
from the Senator's face.

Some thirty minutes later the Countess Sylvia was awakened by the sound
of continued rapping on her door. In answer to her query, "Who's
there?" a man's voice replied, "Open this door, or I'll break it in!"

Williams, however, knew that his threat was an idle one, for the doors
at Brickley Court were built of solid oak that defied anything short of
a battering ram. Which was the reason that he had to wait a full five
minutes, during which time he distinctly heard the sound of paper
rattling and then the rasp of a match as it was struck.

Finally the countess, attired in a bewitching negligée, threw open the
door.

"Ah!" she exclaimed. "So it is you, Mr. Williams! What do you--"

"You know what I want," growled Owen. "That paper you stole from
Lattimer's office to-night. Also the plans you lifted from the Navy
Department. The ones you mailed in New York yesterday afternoon and
which were waiting for you here!"

"Find them!" was the woman's mocking challenge as Williams's eyes roved
over the room and finally rested on a pile of crumbled ashes beside an
alcohol lamp on the table. A moment's examination told him that a blue
print had been burned, but it was impossible to tell what it had been,
and there was no trace of any other paper in the ashes.

"Search her!" he called to a woman in the corridor. "I'm going to rifle
the mail-box downstairs. She can't get away with the same trick three
times!"

And there, in an innocent-looking envelope addressed to a certain
personage whose name stood high on the diplomatic list, Williams
discovered the report for which a woman risked her liberty and gambled
six months of her life!

       *       *       *       *       *

"But the plans?" I asked as Quinn finished.

"Evidently that was what she had burned. She'd taken care to crumple the
ashes so that it was an impossibility to get a shred of direct evidence,
not that it would have made any difference if she hadn't. The government
never prosecutes matters of this kind, except in time of war. They
merely warn the culprit to leave the country and never return--which is
the reason that, while you'll find a number of very interesting
foreigners in Washington at the present moment, the Countess Sylvia
Stefani is not among them. Neither is the personage to whom her letter
was addressed. He was 'recalled' a few weeks later."




XXI

A MILLION-DOLLAR QUARTER


"What's in the phial?" I inquired one evening, as Bill Quinn, formerly
of the United States Secret Service, picked up a small brown bottle from
the table in his den and slipped it into his pocket.

"Saccharine," retorted Quinn, laconically. "Had to come to it in order
to offset the sugar shortage. No telling how long it will continue, and,
meanwhile, we're conserving what we have on hand. So I carry my 'lump
sugar' in my vest pocket, and I'll keep on doing it until conditions
improve. They say the trouble lies at the importing end. Can't secure
enough sugar at the place where the ships are or enough ships at the
place where the sugar is.

"This isn't the first time that sugar has caused trouble, either. See
that twenty-five-cent piece up there on the wall? Apparently it's an
ordinary everyday quarter. But it cost the government well over a
million dollars, money which should have been paid in as import duty on
tons upon tons of sugar.

"Yes, back of that quarter lies a case which is absolutely unique in the
annals of governmental detective work--the biggest and most far-reaching
smuggling plot ever discovered and the one which took the longest time
to solve.

"Nine years seems like a mighty long time to work on a single
assignment, but when you consider that the Treasury collected more than
two million dollars as a direct result of one man's labor during that
time, you'll see that it was worth while."

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole thing really started when Dick Carr went to work as a sugar
sampler [continued Quinn, his eyes fixed meditatively upon the quarter
on the wall].

Some one had tipped the department off to the fact that phony sampling
of some sort was being indulged in and Dick managed to get a place as
assistant on one of the docks where the big sugar ships unloaded. As you
probably know, there's a big difference in the duty on the different
grades of raw sugar; a difference based upon the tests made by expert
chemists as soon as the cargo is landed. Sugar which is only ninety-two
per cent pure, for example, comes in half-a-cent a pound cheaper than
that which is ninety-six per cent pure, and the sampling is accomplished
by inserting a thin glass tube through the wide meshes of the bag or
basket which contains the sugar.

It didn't take Carr very long to find out that the majority of the
samplers were slipping their tubes into the bags at an angle, instead of
shoving them straight in, and that a number of them made a practice of
moistening the outside of the container before they made their tests.
The idea, of course, was that the sugar which had absorbed moisture,
either during the voyage or after reaching the dock--would not "assay"
as pure as would the dry material in the center of the package. A few
experiments, conducted under the cover of night, showed a difference of
four to six per cent in the grade of the samples taken from the inside
of the bag and that taken from a point close to the surface,
particularly if even a small amount of water had been judiciously
applied.

The difference, when translated into terms of a half-a-cent a pound
import duty, didn't take long to run up into hundreds of thousands of
dollars, and Carr's report, made after several months' investigating,
cost a number of sugar samplers their jobs and brought the wrath of the
government down upon the companies which had been responsible for the
practice.

After such an exposure as this, you might think that the sugar people
would have been content to take their legitimate profit and to pay the
duty levied by law. But Carr had the idea that they would try to put
into operation some other scheme for defrauding the Treasury and during
years that followed he kept in close touch with the importing situation
and the personnel of the men employed on the docks.

The active part he had played in the sugar-sampling exposure naturally
prevented his active participation in any attempt to uncover the fraud
from the inside, but it was the direct cause of his being summoned to
Washington when a discharged official of one of the sugar companies
filed a charge that the government was losing five hundred thousand
dollars a year by the illicit operations at a single plant.

"Frankly, I haven't the slightest idea of how it's being done,"
confessed the official in question. "But I am certain that some kind of
a swindle is being perpetrated on a large scale. Here's the proof!"

With that he produced two documents--one the bill of lading of the
steamer _Murbar_, showing the amount of sugar on board when she cleared
Java, and the other the official receipt, signed by a representative of
the sugar company, for her cargo when she reached New York.

"As you will note," continued the informant, "the bill of lading clearly
shows that the _Murbar_ carried eleven million seven hundred thirty-four
thousand six hundred eighty-seven pounds of raw sugar. Yet, when
weighed under the supervision of the customhouse officials a few weeks
later, the cargo consisted of only eleven million thirty-two thousand
and sixteen pounds--a 'shrinkage' of seven hundred two thousand six
hundred seventy-one pounds, about six per cent of the material
shipment."

"And at the present import duty that would amount to about--"

"In the neighborhood of twelve thousand dollars loss on this ship
alone," stated the former sugar official. "Allowing for the arrival of
anywhere from fifty to a hundred ships a year, you can figure the annual
deficit for yourself."

Carr whistled. He had rather prided himself upon uncovering the sampling
frauds a few years previously, but this bade fair to be a far bigger
case--one which would tax every atom of his ingenuity to uncover.

"How long has this been going on?" inquired the acting Secretary of the
Treasury.

"I can't say," admitted the informant. "Neither do I care to state how I
came into possession of these documents. But, as you will find when you
look into the matter, they are entirely authoritative and do not refer
to an isolated case. The _Murbar_ is the rule, not the exception. It's
now up to you people to find out how the fraud was worked."

"He's right, at that," was the comment from the acting Secretary, when
the former sugar official had departed. "The information is undoubtedly
the result of a personal desire to 'get even'--for our friend recently
lost his place with the company in question. However, that hasn't the
slightest bearing upon the truth of his charges. Carr, it's up to you to
find out what there is in 'em!"

"That's a man-sized order, Mr. Secretary," smiled Dick, "especially as
the work I did some time ago on the sampling frauds made me about as
popular as the plague with the sugar people. If I ever poked my nose on
the docks at night you'd be out the price of a big bunch of white roses
the next day!"

"Which means that you don't care to handle the case?"

"Not so that you could notice it!" snapped Carr. "I merely wanted you to
realize the handicaps under which I'll be working, so that there won't
be any demand for instant developments. This case is worth a million
dollars if it's worth a cent. And, because it is so big, it will take a
whole lot longer to round up the details than if we were working on a
matter that concerned only a single individual. If you remember, it took
Joe Gregory nearly six months to land Phyllis Dodge, and therefore--"

"Therefore it ought to take about sixty years to get to the bottom of
this case, eh?"

"Hardly that long. But I would like an assurance that I can dig into
this in my own way and that there won't be any 'Hurry up!' message sent
from this end every week or two."

"That's fair enough," agreed the Assistant Secretary. "You know the ins
and outs of the sugar game better than any man in the service. So hop to
it and take your time. We'll content ourselves with sitting back and
awaiting developments."

Armed with this assurance, Carr went back to New York and began
carefully and methodically to lay his plans for the biggest game ever
hunted by a government detective--a ring protected by millions of
dollars in capital and haunted by the fear that its operations might
some day be discovered.

In spite of the fact that it was necessary to work entirely in the dark,
Dick succeeded in securing the manifests and bills of lading of three
other sugar ships which had recently been unloaded, together with copies
of the receipts of their cargoes. Every one of these indicated the same
mysterious shrinkage en route, amounting to about six per cent of the
entire shipment, and, as Carr figured it, there were but two
explanations which could cover the matter.

Either a certain percentage of the sugar had been removed from the hold
and smuggled into the country before the ship reached New York, or there
was a conspiracy of some kind which involved a number of the weighers on
the docks.

"The first supposition," argued Carr, "is feasible but hardly within the
bounds of probability. If the shortage had occurred in a shipment of
gold or something else which combines high value with small volume,
that's where I'd look for the leak. But when it comes to hundreds of
thousands of pounds of sugar--that's something else. You can't carry
that around in your pockets or even unload it without causing comment
and employing so many assistants that the risk would be extremely great.

"No, the answer must lie right here on the docks--just as it did in the
sampling cases."

So it was on the docks that he concentrated his efforts, working through
the medium of a girl named Louise Wood, whom he planted as a file clerk
and general assistant in the offices of the company which owned the
_Murbar_ and a number of other sugar ships.

This, of course, wasn't accomplished in a day, nor yet in a month. As a
matter of fact, it was February when Carr was first assigned to the case
and it was late in August when the Wood girl went to work. But, as Dick
figured it, this single success was worth all the time and trouble spent
in preparing for it.

It would be hard, therefore, to give any adequate measure of his
disappointment when the girl informed him that everything in her office
appeared to be straight and aboveboard.

"You know, Dick," reported Louise, after she had been at work for a
couple of months, "I'm not the kind that can have the wool pulled over
my eyes. If there was anything crooked going on, I'd spot it before
they'd more than laid their first plans. But I've had the opportunity of
going over the files and the records and it's all on the level."

"Then how are you to account for the discrepancies between the bills of
lading and the final receipts?" queried Carr, almost stunned by the
girl's assurance.

"That's what I don't know," she admitted. "It certainly looks queer, but
of course it is possible that the men who ship the sugar deliberately
falsify the records in order to get more money and that the company pays
these statements as a sort of graft. That I can't say. It doesn't come
under my department, as you know. Neither is it criminal. What I do know
is that the people on the dock have nothing to do with faking the
figures."

"Sure you haven't slipped up anywhere and given them a suspicion as to
your real work?"

"Absolutely certain. I've done my work and done it well. That's what I
was employed for and that's what's given me access to the files. But, as
for suspicion--there hasn't been a trace of it!"

It was in vain that Carr questioned and cross-questioned the girl. She
was sure of herself and sure of her information, positive that no
crooked work was being handled by the men who received the sugar when it
was unloaded from the incoming ships.

Puzzled by the girl's insistence and stunned by the failure of the plan
upon which he had banked so much, Carr gave the matter up as a bad
job--telling Louise that she could stop her work whenever she wished,
but finally agreeing to her suggestion that she continue to hold her
place on the bare chance of uncovering a lead.

"Of course," concluded the girl, "you may be right, after all. They may
have covered their tracks so thoroughly that I haven't been able to pick
up the scent. I really don't believe that they have--but it's worth the
gamble to me if it is to you."

More than a month passed before the significance of this speech dawned
upon Dick, and then only when he chanced to be walking along Fifth
Avenue one Saturday afternoon and saw Louise coming out of Tiffany's
with a small cubical package in her hand.

"Tiffany's--" he muttered. "I wonder--"

Then, entering the store, he sought out the manager and stated that he
would like to find out what a lady, whom he described, had just
purchased. The flash of his badge which accompanied this request turned
the trick.

"Of course, it's entirely against our rules," explained the store
official, "but we are always glad to do anything in our power to assist
the government. Just a moment. I'll call the clerk who waited on her."

"The lady," he reported a few minutes later, "gave her name as Miss
Louise Wood and her address as--"

"I know where she lives," snapped Carr. "What did she buy?"

"A diamond and platinum ring."

"The price?"

"Eight hundred and fifty dollars."

"Thanks," said the operative and was out of the office before the
manager could frame any additional inquiries.

When the Wood girl answered a rather imperative ring at the door of her
apartment she was distinctly surprised at the identity of her caller,
for she and Carr had agreed that it would not be wise for them to meet
except by appointment in some out-of-the-way place.

"Dick!" she exclaimed. "What brings you here? Do you think it's safe?"

"Safe or not," replied the operative, entering and closing the door
behind him. "I'm here and here I'm going to stay until I find out
something. Where did you get the money to pay for that ring you bought
at Tiffany's to-day?"

"Money? Ring?" echoed the girl. "What are you talking about?"

"You know well enough! Now don't stall. Come through! Where'd you get
it?"

"An--an aunt died and left it to me," but the girl's pale face and
halting speech belied her words.

"Try another one," sneered Carr. "Where did you get that eight hundred
and fifty dollars?"

"What business is it of yours? Can't I spend my own money in my own way
without being trailed and hounded all over the city?"

"You can spend your own money--the money you earn by working and the
money I pay you for keeping your eyes open on the dock as you please.
But--" and here Carr reached forward and grasped the girl's wrist,
drawing her slowly toward him, so that her eyes looked straight into
his, "when it comes to spending other money--money that you got for
keeping your mouth shut and putting it over on me--that's another
story."

"I didn't, Dick; I didn't!"

"Can you look me straight in the eyes and say that they haven't paid you
for being blind? That they didn't suspect what you came to the dock
for, and declared you in on the split? No! I didn't think you could!"

With that he flung her on a couch and moved toward the door. Just as his
hand touched the knob he heard a voice behind him, half sob and half
plea, cry, "Dick!"

Reluctantly he turned.

"Dick, as there's a God in heaven I didn't mean to double cross you. But
they were on to me from the first. They planted some stamps in my pocket
during the first week I was there and then gave me my choice of bein'
pulled for thieving or staying there at double pay. I didn't want to do
it, but they had the goods on me and I had to. They said all I had to do
was to tell you that nothing crooked was goin' on--and they'll pay me
well for it."

"While you were also drawing money from me, eh?"

"Sure I was, Dick. I couldn't ask you to stop my pay. You'd have
suspected. Besides, as soon as you were done with me, they were, too."

"That's where the eight hundred and fifty dollars came from?"

"Yes, and a lot more. Oh, they pay well, all right!"

For fully a minute there was silence in the little apartment, broken
only by the sobs of the girl on the couch. Finally Carr broke the
strain.

"There's only one way for you to square yourself," he announced. "Tell
me everything you know--the truth and every word of it!"

"That's just it, Dick. I don't know anything--for sure. There's
something goin' on. No doubt of that. But what it is I don't know. They
keep it under cover in the scale house."

"In the scale house?"

"Yes; they don't allow anyone in there without a permit. Somebody
uptown tips 'em off whenever a special agent is coming down, so they can
fix things. But none of the staff knows, though nearly all of them are
drawin' extra money for keeping their mouths shut."

"Who are the men who appear to be implicated?"

"Mahoney, the checker for the company, and Derwent, the government
weigher."

"Derwent!"

"Yes, he's in on it, too. I tell you, Dick, the thing's bigger than you
ever dreamed. It's like an octopus, with tentacles that are fastened on
everyone connected with the place."

"But no clue as to the location of the body of the beast?"

"Can't you guess? You know the number of their office uptown. But
there's no use hoping to nab them. They're too well protected. I doubt
if you can even get at the bottom of the affair on the dock."

"I don't doubt it!" Carr's chin had settled itself determinedly and his
mouth was a thin red line. "I'm going to give you a chance to redeem
yourself. Go back to work as usual on Monday. Don't let on, by word or
gesture, that anything has changed. Just await developments. If you'll
do that, I'll see that you're not implicated. More than that, I'll
acknowledge you at the proper time as my agent--planted there to double
cross the fraud gang. You'll have your money and your glory and your
satisfaction of having done the right thing, even though you didn't
intend to do it. Are you on?"

"I am, Dick. I won't say a word. I promise!"

"Good! You'll probably see me before long. But don't recognize me.
You'll be just one of the girls and it'll probably be necessary to
include you in the round-up. I'll fix that later. Good-by," and with
that he was off.

Not expecting that Carr would be able to complete his plans for at least
a week, Louise was startled when the operative arrived at the dock on
the following Monday morning. He had spent the previous day in
Washington, arranging details, and his appearance at the company's
office--while apparently casual--was part of the program mapped out in
advance. What was more, Carr had come to the dock from the station, so
as to prevent the "inside man" from flashing a warning of his arrival.

Straight through the office he strode, his right hand swinging at his
side, his left thrust nonchalantly in the pocket of his topcoat.

Before he had crossed halfway to the door of the scale room he was
interrupted by a burly individual, who demanded his business.

"I want to see Mr. Derwent or Mr. Mahoney," replied Carr.

"They're both engaged at present," was the answer. "Wait here, and I'll
tell them."

"Get out of my road!" growled the operative, pulling back the lapel of
his coat sufficiently to afford a glimpse of his badge. "I'll see them
where they are," and before the guardian of the scale house door had
recovered from his astonishment Carr was well across the portals.

The first thing that caught his eye was the figure of a man bending over
the weight beam of one of the big scales, while another man was making
some adjustments on the other side of the apparatus.

Derwent, who was facing the door, was the first to see Carr, but before
he could warn his companion, the special agent was on top of them.

"Who are you? What business have you in here?" demanded the government
weigher.

"Carr is my name," replied Dick. "Possibly you've heard of me. If so,
you know my business. Catching sugar crooks!"

Derwent's face went white for a moment and then flushed a deep red.
Mahoney, however, failed to alter his position. He remained bending over
the weight beam, his finger nails scratching at something underneath.

"Straighten up there!" ordered Carr. "You--Mahoney--I mean! Straighten
up!"

"I'll see you in hell first!" snapped the other.

"You'll be there soon enough if you don't get up!" was Carr's reply, as
his left hand emerged from his coat pocket, bringing to light the
blue-steel barrel of a forty-five. "Get--"

Just at that moment, from a point somewhere near the door of the scale
room, came a shrill, high-pitched cry--a woman's voice:

"Dick!" it called. "Lookout! Jump!"

Instantly, involuntarily, the operative leaped sidewise, and as he did
so a huge bag of raw sugar crashed to the floor, striking directly on
the spot where he had stood.

"Thanks, Lou," called Carr, without turning his head. "You saved me that
time all right! Now, gentlemen, before any more bags drop, suppose we
adjourn uptown. We're less likely to be interrupted there," and he
sounded a police whistle, which brought a dozen assistants on the run.

"Search Mahoney," he directed. "I don't think Derwent has anything on
him. What's that Mahoney has in his hand?"

"Nothin' but a quarter, sir, an' what looks like an old wad o' chewin'
gum."

Puzzled, Carr examined the coin. Then the explanation of the whole
affair flashed upon him as he investigated the weight-beam and found
fragments of gum adhering to the lower part, near the free end.

"So that was the trick, eh?" he inquired. "Quite a delicate bit of
mechanism, this scale--in spite of the fact that it was designed to
weigh tons of material. Even a quarter, gummed on to the end of the
beam, would throw the whole thing out enough to make it well worth
while. I think this coin and the wad of gum will make very interesting
evidence--Exhibits A and B--at the trial, after we've rounded up the
rest of you."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And that," concluded Quinn, "is the story which lies behind that
twenty-five-cent piece--probably the most valuable bit of money, judged
from the standpoint of what it has accomplished, in the world."

"Derwent and Mahoney?" I asked. "What happened to them? And did Carr
succeed in landing the men higher up?"

"Unfortunately," and Quinn smiled rather ruefully, "there is such a
thing as the power of money. The government brought suit against the
sugar companies implicated in the fraud and commenced criminal
proceedings against the men directly responsible for the manipulation of
the scales. (It developed that they had another equally lucrative method
of using a piece of thin corset steel to alter the weights.) But the
case was quashed upon the receipt of a check for more than two million
dollars, covering back duties uncollected, so the personal indictments
were allowed to lapse. It remains, however, the only investigation I
ever heard of in which success was so signal and the amount involved so
large.

"Todd, of the Department of Justice, handled a big affair not long
afterward, but, while some of the details were even more unusual and
exciting, the theft was only a paltry two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars."

"Which case was that?"

"The looting of the Central Trust Company," replied the former
operative, rising and stretching himself. "Get along with you. It's time
for me to lock up."




XXII

"THE LOOTING OF THE C. T. C."


There was a wintry quality in the night itself that made a comfortable
chair and an open fire distinctly worth the payment of a luxury tax. Add
to this the fact that the chairs in the library den of William J.
Quinn--formerly "Bill Quinn, United States Secret Service"--were roomy
and inviting, while the fire fairly crackled with good cheer, and you'll
know why the conversation, after a particularly good dinner on the
evening in question, was punctuated by pauses and liberally interlarded
with silences.

Finally, feeling that it was really necessary that I say something, I
remarked upon the fierceness of the wind and the biting, stinging sleet
which accompanied a typical January storm.

"Makes one long for Florida," I added.

"Yes," agreed Quinn, "or even some point farther south. On a night like
this you can hardly blame a man for heading for Honduras, even if he did
carry away a quarter of a million of the bank's deposits with him."

"Huh? Who's been looting the local treasury?" I asked, thinking that I
was on the point of getting some advance information.

"No one that I know of," came from the depths of Quinn's big armchair.
"I was just thinking of Florida and warm weather, and that naturally led
to Honduras, which, in turn, recalled Rockwell to my mind. Ever hear of
Rockwell?"

"Don't think I ever did. What was the connection between him and the
quarter-million you mentioned?"

"Quite a bit. Rather intimate, as you might say. But not quite as much
as he had planned. However, if it hadn't been for Todd--"

"Todd?"

"Yes--Ernest E. Todd, of the Department of Justice. 'Extra Ernest,' they
used to call him, because he'd never give up a job until he brought it
in, neatly wrapped and ready for filing. More than one man has had cause
to believe that Todd's parents chose the right name for him. He may not
have been much to look at--but he sure was earnest."

       *       *       *       *       *

Take the Rockwell case, for example [Quinn went on, after a preliminary
puff or two to see that his pipe was drawing well]. No one had the
slightest idea that the Central Trust Company wasn't in the best of
shape. Its books always balanced to a penny. There was never anything to
cause the examiner to hesitate, and its officials were models of
propriety. Particularly Rockwell, the cashier. Not only was he a pillar
of the church, but he appeared to put his religious principles into
practice on the other six days of the week as well. He wasn't married,
but that only boosted his stock in the eyes of the community, many of
which had daughters of an age when wedding bells sound very tuneful and
orange blossoms are the sweetest flowers that grow.

When they came to look into the matter later on, nobody seemed to know
much about Mr. Rockwell's antecedents. He'd landed a minor position in
the bank some fifteen years before and had gradually lifted himself to
the cashiership. Seemed to have an absolute genius for detail and the
handling of financial matters.

So it was that when Todd went back home on a vacation and happened to
launch some of his ideas on criminology--ideas founded on an intensive
study of Lombroso and other experts--he quickly got himself into deep
water.

During the course of a dinner at one of the hotels, "E. E." commenced to
expound certain theories relating to crime and the physical appearance
of the criminal.

"Do you know," he inquired, "that it's the simplest thing in the world
to tell whether a man--or even a boy, for that matter--has criminal
tendencies? There are certain unmistakable physical details that point
unerringly to what the world might call 'laxity of conscience,' but
which is nothing less than a predisposition to evil, a tendency to
crime. The lobes of the ears, the height and shape of the forehead, the
length of the little finger, the contour of the hand--all these are of
immense value in determining whether a man will go straight or crooked.
Employers are using them more and more every day. The old-fashioned
phrenologist, with his half-formed theories and wild guesses, has been
displaced by the modern student of character, who relies upon certain
rules which vary so little as to be practically immutable."

"Do you mean to say," asked one of the men at the table, "that you can
tell that a man is a criminal simply by looking at him?"

"If that's the case," cut in another, "why don't you lock 'em all up?"

"But it isn't the case," was Todd's reply. "The physical characteristics
to which I refer only mean that a man is likely to develop along the
wrong lines. They are like the stars which, as Shakespeare remarked,
'incline, but do not compel.' If you remember, he added, 'The fault,
dear Brutus, lies in ourselves.' Therefore, if a detective of the modern
school is working on a case and he comes across a man who bears one or
more of these very certain brands of Cain, he watches that man very
carefully--at least until he is convinced that he is innocent. You can't
arrest a man simply because he looks like a crook, but it is amazing how
often the guideposts point in the right direction."

"Anyone present that you suspect of forgery or beating his wife?" came
in a bantering voice from the other end of the table.

"If you're in earnest," answered the government agent, "lay your hands
on the table."

And everyone present, including Rockwell, cashier of the Central Trust
Company, placed his hands, palm upward, on the cloth--though there was a
distinct hesitation in several quarters.

Slowly, deliberately, Todd looked around the circle of hands before him.
Then, with quite as much precision, he scanned the faces and
particularly the ears of his associates. Only once did his gaze hesitate
longer than usual, and then not for a sufficient length of time to make
it apparent.

"No," he finally said. "I'd give every one of you a clean bill of
health. Apparently you're all right. But," and he laughed, "remember, I
said 'apparently.' So don't blame me if there's a murder committed
before morning and one or more of you is arrested for it!"

That was all there was to the matter until Todd, accompanied by two of
his older friends, left the grill and started to walk home.

"That was an interesting theory of yours," commented one of the men,
"but wasn't it only a theory? Is there any real foundation of fact?"

"You mean my statement that you can tell by the shape of a man's head
and hands whether he has a predisposition to crime?"

"Yes."

"It's far from a theory, inasmuch as it has the support of hundreds of
cases which are on record. Besides, I had a purpose in springing it when
I did. In fact, it partook of the nature of an experiment."

"You mean you suspected some one present--"

"Not suspected, but merely wondered if he would submit to the test. I
knew that one of the men at the table would call for it. Some one in a
crowd always does--and I had already noted a startling peculiarity about
the forehead, nose, and ears of a certain dinner companion. I merely
wanted to find out if he had the nerve to withstand my inspection of his
hands. I must say that he did, without flinching."

"But who was the man?"

"I barely caught his name," replied Todd, "and this conversation must be
in strict confidence. After all, criminologists do not maintain that
every man who looks like a crook is one. They simply state and prove
that ninety-five per cent of the deliberate criminals, men who plan
their wrong well in advance, bear these marks. And the man who sat
across the table from me to-night has them, to an amazing degree."

"Across the table from you? Why that was Rockwell, cashier of the
Central Trust!"

"Precisely," stated Todd, "and the only reason that I am making this
admission is because I happen to know that both of you bank there."

"But," protested one of the other men, "Rockwell has been with them for
years. He's worked himself up from the very bottom and had hundreds of
chances to make away with money if he wanted to. He's as straight as a
die."

"Very possibly he is," Todd agreed. "That's the reason that I warn you
that what I said was in strict confidence. Neither one of you is to say
a word that would cast suspicion on Rockwell. It would be fatal to his
career. On the other hand, I wanted to give you the benefit of my
judgment, which, if you remember, you requested."

But it didn't take a character analyst to see that the Department of
Justice man had put his foot in it, so far as his friends were
concerned. They were convinced of the cashier's honesty and no theories
founded on purely physical attributes could swerve them. They kept the
conversation to themselves, but Todd left town feeling that he had lost
the confidence of two of his former friends.

It was about a month later that he ran into Weldon, the Federal Bank
Examiner for that section of the country, and managed to make a few
discreet inquiries about Rockwell and the Central Trust Company without,
however, obtaining even a nibble.

"Everything's flourishing," was the verdict. "Accounts straight as a
string and they appear to be doing an excellent business. Fairly heavy
on notes, it's true, but they're all well indorsed. Why'd you ask? Any
reason to suspect anyone?"

"Not the least," lied Todd. "It's my home town, you know, and I know a
lot of people who bank at the C. T. C. Just like to keep in touch with
how things are going. By the way, when do you plan to make your next
inspection?"

"Think I'll probably be in there next Wednesday. Want me to say 'Hello'
to anybody?"

"No, I'm not popular in certain quarters," Todd laughed. "They say I
have too many theories--go off half cocked and all that sort of thing."

Nevertheless the Department of Justice operative arranged matters so
that he reached his home city on Tuesday of the following week,
discovering, by judicious inquiries, that the visit of the examiner had
not been forecast. In fact, he wasn't expected for a month or more. But
that's the way it is best to work. If bank officials know when to look
out for an examiner, they can often fix things on their books which
would not bear immediate inspection.

Weldon arrived on schedule early the following morning, and commenced
his examination of the accounts of the First National, as was his habit.

As soon as Todd knew that he was in town he took up his position outside
the offices of the Central Trust, selecting a vantage point which would
give him a clear view of both entrances of the bank.

"Possibly," he argued to himself, "I am a damn fool. But just the same,
I have a mighty well-defined hunch that Mr. Rockwell isn't on the level,
and I ought to find out pretty soon."

Then events began to move even quicker than he had hoped.

The first thing he noted was that Jafferay, one of the bookkeepers of
the C. T. C., slipped out of a side door of the bank and dropped a
parcel into the mail box which stood beside the entrance. Then, a few
minutes later, a messenger came out and made his way up the street to
the State National, where--as Todd, who was on his heels--had little
trouble in discovering--he cashed a cashier's check for one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars, returning to the Central Trust Company with the
money in his valise.

"Of course," Todd reasoned, "Rockwell may be ignorant of the fact that
Weldon doesn't usually get around to the State National until he has
inspected all the other banks. Hence the check will have already gone to
the clearing house and will appear on the books merely as an item of one
hundred and fifty thousand dollars due, rather than as a check from the
Central Trust. Yes, he may be ignorant of the fact--but it does look
funny. Wonder what that bookkeeper mailed?"

Working along the last line of reasoning, the government operative
stopped at the post office long enough to introduce himself to the
postmaster, present his credentials, and inquire if the mail from the
box outside the Central Trust Company had yet been collected. Learning
that it had, he asked permission to inspect it.

"You can look it over if you wish," stated the postmaster, "but, of
course, I have no authority to allow you to open any of it. Even the
Postmaster-General himself couldn't do that."

"Certainly," agreed Todd. "I merely want to see the address on a certain
parcel and I'll make affidavit, if you wish, that I have reason to
suppose that the mails are being used for illegal purposes."

"That won't be necessary. We'll step down to the parcel room and soon
find out what you want."

Some five minutes later Todd learned that the parcel which he
recognized--a long roll covered with wrapping paper, so that it was
impossible to gain even an idea of what it contained--was addressed to
Jafferay, the bookkeeper, at his home address.

"Thanks! Now if you can give me some idea of when this'll be delivered I
won't bother you any more. About five o'clock this afternoon? Fine!" and
the man from Washington was out of the post office before anyone could
inquire further concerning his mission.

A telephone call disclosed the fact that Weldon was then making his
examination of the Central Trust Company books and could not be
disturbed, but Todd managed to get him later in the afternoon and made
an appointment for dinner, on the plea of official business which he
wished to discuss.

That afternoon he paid a visit to the house of a certain Mr. Jafferay
and spent an hour in a vain attempt to locate the bank examiner.

Promptly at six o'clock that official walked into Todd's room at the
hotel, to find the operative pacing restlessly up and down, visibly
excited and clutching what appeared to be a roll of paper.

"What's the matter?" asked Weldon. "I'm on time. Didn't keep you waiting
a minute?"

"No!" snapped Todd, "but where have you been for the last hour? Been
trying to reach you all over town."

"Great Scott! man, even a human adding machine has a right to take a
little rest now and then. If you must know, I've been getting a shave
and a haircut. Anything criminal in that?"

"Can't say that there is," and Todd relaxed enough to smile at his
vehemence. "But there is in this," unrolling the parcel that he still
held and presenting several large sheets of ruled paper for the
examiner's attention. "Recognise them?"

"They appear to be loose leaves from the ledgers at the Central Trust
Company."

"Precisely. Were they there when you went over the books this morning?"

"I don't recall them, but it's possible they may have been."

"No--they weren't. One of the bookkeepers mailed them to himself, at his
home address, while you were still at the First National. If I hadn't
visited his house this afternoon, in the guise of a book agent, and
taken a long chance by lifting this roll of paper, he'd have slipped
them back in place in the morning and nobody'd been any the wiser."

"Then you mean that the bookkeeper is responsible for falsifying the
accounts?"

"Only partially. Was the cash O. K. at the Central Trust?"

"Perfectly."

"Do you recall any record of a check for one hundred and fifty thousand
dollars upon the State National drawn and cashed this morning?"

"No, there was no such check."

"Yes, there was. I was present when the messenger cashed it and he took
the money back to the C. T. C. They knew you wouldn't get around to the
State before morning, and by that time the check would have gone to the
clearing house, giving them plenty of time to make the cash balance to a
penny."

"Whom do you suspect of manipulating the funds?"

"The man who signed the check--Rockwell, the cashier! That's why I was
trying to get hold of you. I haven't the authority to demand admittance
to the Central Trust vaults, but you have. Then, if matters are as I
figure them, I'll take charge of the case as an agent of the Department
of Justice."

"Come on!" was Weldon's response. "We'll get up there right away, No use
losing time over it!"

At the bank, however, they were told that the combination to the vault
was known to only three persons--the president of the bank, Rockwell,
and the assistant cashier. The president, it developed, was out of
town. Rockwell's house failed to answer the phone, and it was a good
half hour before the assistant cashier put in an appearance.

When, in compliance with Weldon's orders, he swung back the heavy doors
which guarded the vault where the currency was stored, he swung around,
amazed.

"It's empty!" he whispered. "Not a thing there save the bags of coin.
Why, I put some two hundred and fifty thousand dollars in paper money in
there myself this afternoon!"

"Who was here at the time?" demanded Todd.

"Only Mr. Rockwell. I remember distinctly that he said he would have to
work a little longer, but that there wouldn't be any necessity for my
staying. So I put the money in there, locked the door, and went on
home."

"Do you know where Rockwell is now?"

"At his house, I suppose. He lives at--"

"I know where he lives," snapped Todd. "I also know that he isn't there.
I've had the place watched since five o'clock this afternoon--but
Rockwell hasn't shown up. Like the money--I think we can say 'with the
money'--he's gone, disappeared, vanished."

"Then," said Weldon, "it is up to you to find him. My part of the job
ceased the moment the shortage was disclosed."

"I know that and if you'll attend to making a report on the matter,
order the arrest of Jafferay, and spread the report of Rockwell's
embezzlement through police circles, I'll get busy on my own hook.
Good-by." And an instant later Todd was hailing a taxi and ordering the
chauffeur to break all the speed laws in reaching the house where
Rockwell boarded.

Examination of the cashier's room and an extended talk with the
landlady failed, however, to disclose anything which might be termed a
clue. The missing official had visited the house shortly after noon, but
had not come back since the bank closed. He had not taken a valise or
suit case with him, declared the mistress of the house, but he had seemed
"just a leetle bit upset."

Quickly, but efficiently, Todd examined the room--even inspecting the
bits of paper in the wastebasket and pawing over the books which lined
the mantel. Three of the former he slipped into his pocket and then,
turning, inquired:

"Was Mr. Rockwell fond of cold weather?"

"No, indeed," was the reply. "He hated winter. Said he never was
comfortable from November until May. He always--"

But the "queer gentleman," as the landlady afterward referred to him,
was out of the house before she could detail her pet story of the
cashier's fondness for heat, no matter at what cost.

No one at the station had seen Rockwell board a train, but inquiry at
the taxicab offices revealed the fact that a man, with his overcoat
collar turned up until it almost met his hat brim, had taken a cab for a
near-by town, where it would be easy for him to make connections either
north or south.

Stopping only to wire Washington the bare outline of the case, with the
suggestion that the Canadian border be watched, "though it is almost
certain that Rockwell is headed south," Todd picked up the trail at the
railroad ticket office, some ten miles distant, and found that a man
answering to the description of his prey had bought passage as far as
St. Louis. But, despite telegraphic instructions, the Saint Louis police
were unable to apprehend anyone who looked like Rockwell and the
government operative kept right on down the river, stopping at Memphis
to file a message to the authorities in New Orleans.

It was precisely a week after the looting of the Central Trust Company
that Todd stood on the docks in New Orleans, watching the arrival of the
passengers and baggage destined to go aboard the boat for Honduras.
Singly and in groups they arrived until, when the "all ashore" signal
sounded, the operative began to wonder if he were really on the right
trail. Then, at the last minute, a cab drove up and a woman, apparently
suffering from rheumatism, made her way toward the boat. Scenting a tip,
two stewards sprang to assist her, but Todd beat them to it.

"Pardon me, madam," he said, "may I not--Drat that fly!" and with that
he made a pass at something in front of his face and accidentally
brushed aside the veil which hid the woman's face.

He had barely time to realize that, as he had suspected, it was
Rockwell, disguised, before the "woman" had slipped out of the light
wrap which she had been wearing and was giving him what he later
admitted was the "scrap of his life." In fact, for several moments he
not only had to fight Rockwell, but several bystanders as well--for they
had only witnessed what they supposed was a totally uncalled for attack
upon a woman. In the mixup that followed Rockwell managed to slip away
and, before Todd had a chance to recover, was halfway across the street,
headed for the entrance to a collection of shanties which provided an
excellent hiding place.

Tearing himself loose, Todd whipped out his revolver and fired at the
figure just visible in the gathering dusk, scoring a clean shot just
above the ankle--a flesh wound, that ripped the leg muscles without
breaking a bone. With a groan of despair Rockwell toppled over, clawing
wildly in an attempt to reach his revolver. But Todd was on top of him
before the cashier could swing the gun into action, and a pair of
handcuffs finished the career of the man who had planned to loot the C.
T. C. of a quarter million in cold cash.

"The next time you try a trick like that," Todd advised him, on the
train that night, "be careful what you leave behind in your room. The
two torn letterheads of the Canadian Pacific nearly misled me, but the
other one referring to the Honduran line, plus the book on Honduras and
the fact that your landlady stated that you hated cold weather, gave you
dead away. Of course, even without that, it was a toss-up between Canada
and Central America. Those are the only two places where an embezzler is
comparatively safe these days. I hope, for the sake of your comfort,
they give you plenty of blankets in Joliet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Quinn paused a moment to repack his pipe, and then, "So far as I know,
he's still handling the prison finances," he added. "Yes--they found at
the trial that he had had a clean record up to the moment he slipped,
but the criminal tendencies were there and he wasn't able to resist
temptation. He had speculated with the bank funds, covered his shortages
by removing the pages from the ledger and kiting checks through the
State National, and then determined to risk everything in one grand
clean-up.

"He might have gotten away with it, too, if Todd hadn't spotted the
peculiarities which indicated moral weakness. However, you can't always
tell. No one who knew Mrs. Armitage would have dreamed that she
was--what she was."

"Well," I inquired, "what was she?"

"That's what puzzled Washington and the State Department for several
months," replied Quinn. "It's too long a story to spin to-night. That's
her picture up there, if you care to study her features."

And I went home wondering what were the crimes of which such a beautiful
woman could have been guilty.




XXIII

THE CASE OF MRS. ARMITAGE


To look at him no one would have thought that Bill Quinn had a trace of
sentiment in his make-up. Apparently he was just the grizzled old
veteran of a hundred battles with crime, the last of which--a raid on a
counterfeiter's den in Long Island--had laid him up with a game leg and
a soft berth in the Treasury Department, where, for years he had been an
integral part of the United States Secret Service.

But in the place of honor in Quinn's library-den there hung the
photograph of a stunningly handsome woman, her sable coat thrown back
just enough to afford a glimpse of a throat of which Juno might have
been proud, while in her eyes there sparkled a light which seemed to
hint at much but reveal little. It was very evident that she belonged to
a world entirely apart from that of Quinn, yet the very fact that her
photograph adorned the walls of his den proved that she had been
implicated in some case which had necessitated Secret Service
investigation--for the den was the shrine of relics relating to cases in
which Quinn's friends had figured.

Finally, one evening I gathered courage to inquire about her.

"Armitage was her name," Quinn replied. "Lelia Armitage. At least that
was the name she was known by in Washington, and even the investigations
which followed Melville Taylor's exposure of her foreign connections
failed to reveal that she had been known by any other, save her maiden
name of Lawrence."

"Where is she now?" I asked.

"You'll have to ask me something easier," and Quinn smiled, a trifle
wistfully, I thought. "Possibly in London, perhaps in Paris, maybe in
Rio or the Far East. But wherever she is, the center of attention is not
very far away from her big violet-black eyes. Also the police of the
country where she is residing probably wish that they had never been
burdened with her."

"You mean--"

"That she was a crook? Not as the word is usually understood. But more
than one string of valuable pearls or diamonds has disappeared when
milady Armitage was in the neighborhood--though they were never able to
prove that she had lifted a thing. No, her principal escapade in this
country brought her into contact with the Secret Service, rather than
the police officials--which is probably the reason she was nailed with
the goods. You remember the incident of the 'leak' in the peace note,
when certain Wall Street interests cleaned up millions of dollars?"

"Perfectly. Was she to blame for that?"

"They never settled who was to blame for it, but Mrs. Armitage was
dealing through a young and decidedly attractive Washington broker at
the time and her account mysteriously multiplied itself half a dozen
times.

"Then there was the affair of the Carruthers Code, the one which
ultimately led to her exposure at the hands of Taylor and Madelaine
James."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Carruthers Code [Quinn went on] was admittedly the cleverest and yet
the simplest system of cipher communication ever devised on this side
of the Atlantic, with the possible exception of the one mentioned in
Jules Verne's "Giant Raft"--the one that Dr. Heinrich Albert used with
such success. Come to think of it, Verne wasn't an American, was he? He
ought to have been, though. He invented like one.

In some ways the Carruthers system was even more efficient than the
Verne cipher. You could use it with less difficulty, for one thing, and
the key was susceptible of an almost infinite number of variations. Its
only weakness lay in the fact that the secret had to be written
down--and it was in connection with the slip of paper which contained
this that Mrs. Armitage came into prominence.

For some two years Lelia Armitage had maintained a large and expensive
establishment on Massachusetts Avenue, not far from Sheridan Circle.
Those who claimed to know stated that there had been a Mr. Armitage, but
that he had died, leaving his widow enough to make her luxuriously
comfortable for the remainder of her life. In spite of the incidents of
the jeweled necklaces, no one took the trouble to inquire into Mrs.
Armitage's past until the leak in connection with the peace note and the
subsequent investigation of Paul Connor's brokerage house led to the
discovery that her name was among those who had benefited most largely
by the advance information.

It was at that time that Melville Taylor was detailed to dig back into
her history and see what he could discover. As was only natural, he went
at once to Madelaine James, who had been of assistance to the Service in
more than one Washington case which demanded feminine finesse, plus an
intimate knowledge of social life in the national capital.

"Madelaine," he inquired, "what do you know of a certain Mrs. Lelia
Armitage?"

"Nothing particularly--except that one sees her everywhere. Apparently
has plenty of money. Supposed to have gotten it from her husband, who
has been dead for some time. Dresses daringly but expensively,
and--while there are at least a score of men, ranging all the way from
lieutenants in the army to captains of industry, who would like to marry
her--she has successfully evaded scandal and almost gotten away from
gossip."

"Where'd she come from?"

"London, I believe, by way of New York. Maiden name was Lawrence and the
late but not very lamented Mr. Armitage was reputed to have made his
money in South Africa."

"All of which," commented Taylor, "is rather vague--particularly for
purposes of a detailed report."

"Report? In what connection?"

"Her name appears on the list of Connor's clients as one of the ones who
cleaned up on the 'leak.' Sold short and made a barrel of money when
stocks came down. The question is, Where did she get the tip?"

"Possibly from Paul Connor himself."

"Possibly--but I wish you'd cultivate her acquaintance and see if you
can pick up anything that would put us on the right track."

But some six weeks later when Taylor was called upon to make a report of
his investigations he had to admit that the sheet was a blank.

"Chief," he said, "either the Armitage woman is perfectly innocent or
else she's infernally clever. I've pumped everyone dry about her, and a
certain friend of mine, whom you know, has made a point of getting next
to the lady herself. She's dined there a couple of times and has talked
to her at a dozen teas and receptions. But without success. Mrs.
Armitage has been very frank and open about what she calls her 'good
fortune' on the stock market. Says she followed her intuition and sold
short when everyone else was buying. What's more, she says it with such
a look of frank honesty that, according to Madelaine, you almost have to
believe her."

"Has Miss James been able to discover anything of the lady's past
history?"

"Nothing more than we already know--born in England--husband made a
fortune in South Africa--died and left it to her. Have you tried tracing
her from the other side?"

"Yes, but they merely disclaim all knowledge of her. Don't even
recognize the description. That may mean anything. Well," and chief
sighed rather disconsolately, for the leak puzzle had been a knotty one
from the start, "I guess we'd better drop her. Too many other things
going on to worry about a woman whose only offense seems to be an
intuitive knowledge of the way Wall Street's going to jump."

It was at that moment that Mahoney, assistant to the chief, came in with
the information that the Secretary of State desired the presence of the
head of the Secret Service in his office immediately.

In answer to a snapped, "Come along--this may be something that you can
take care of right away!" Taylor followed the chief to the State
Department, where they were soon closeted with one of the under
secretaries.

"You are familiar with the Carruthers Code?" inquired the Assistant
Secretary.

"I know the principle on which it operates," the chief replied, "but I
can't say that I've ever come into contact with it."

"So far as we know," went on the State Department official, "it is the
most efficient cipher system in the world--simple, easy to operate,
almost impossible to decode without the key, and susceptible of being
changed every day, or every hour if necessary, without impairing its
value. However, in common with every other code, it has this
weakness--once the key is located the entire system is practically
valueless.

"When did you discover the disappearance of the code secret?" asked
Taylor, examining his cigarette with an exaggerated display of interest.

"How did you know it was lost?" demanded the Under Secretary.

"I didn't--but the fact that your chief sent for mine and then you
launch into a dissertation on the subject of the code itself is open to
but one construction--some one has lifted the key to the cipher."

"Yes, some one has. At least, it was in this safe last night"--here a
wave of his hand indicated a small and rather old-fashioned strong box
in the corner--"and it wasn't there when I arrived this morning. I
reported the matter to the Secretary and he asked me to give you the
details."

"You are certain that the cipher was there last evening?" asked the
chief.

"Not the cipher itself--at least not a code-book as the term is
generally understood," explained the Under Secretary. "That's one of the
beauties of the Carruthers system. You don't have to lug a bulky book
around with you all the time. A single slip of paper--a cigarette paper
would answer excellently--will contain the data covering a man's
individual code. The loss or theft of one of these would be
inconvenient, but not fatal. The loss of the master key, which was in
that safe, is irreparable. If it once gets out of the country it means
that the decoding of our official messages is merely a question of time,
no matter how often we switch the individual ciphers."

"What was the size of the master key, as you call it?"

"Merely a slip of government bond, about six inches long by some two
inches deep."

"Was it of such a nature that it could have been easily copied?"

"Yes, but anything other than a careful tracing or a photographic copy
would be valueless. The position of the letters and figures mean as much
as the marks themselves. Whoever took it undoubtedly knows this and will
endeavor to deliver the original--as a mark of good faith, if nothing
else."

"Was this the only copy in existence?"

"There are two others--one in the possession of the Secretary, the other
in the section which has charge of decoding messages. Both of these are
safe, as I ascertained as soon as I discovered that my slip was
missing."

A few more questions failed to bring out anything more about the mystery
beyond the fact that the Assistant Secretary was certain that he had
locked the safe the evening before and he knew that he had found it
locked when he arrived that morning.

"All of which," as Taylor declared, "means but little. The safe is of
the vintage of eighteen seventy, the old-fashioned kind where you can
hear the tumblers drop clean across the room. Look!" and he pointed to
the japanned front of the safe where a circular mark, some two inches in
diameter, was visible close to the dial.

"Yes, but what is it?" demanded the Secretary.

"The proof that you locked the safe last night," Taylor responded.
"Whoever abstracted the cipher key opened the safe with the aid of some
instrument that enabled them clearly to detect the fall of the tumblers.
Probably a stethoscope, such as physicians use for listening to a
patient's heart. Perfectly simple when you know how--particularly with
an old model like this."

Finding that there was no further information available, Taylor and the
chief left the department, the chief to return to headquarters, Taylor
to endeavor to pick up the trail wherever he could.

"It doesn't look like an inside job," was the parting comment of the
head of the Secret Service. "Anyone who had access to the safe would
have made some excuse to discover the combination, rather than rely on
listening to the click of the tumblers. Better get after the night
watchman and see if he can give you a line on any strangers who were
around the building last night."

But the night watchman when roused from his sound forenoon's sleep was
certain that no one had entered the building on the previous evening
save those who had business there.

"Everybody's got to use a pass now, you know," he stated. "I was on the
job all night myself an' divvle a bit of anything out of the ordinary
did I see. There was Mr. McNight and Mr. Lester and Mr. Greene on the
job in the telegraph room, and the usual crowd of correspondents over in
the press room, and a score of others who works there regular, an' Mrs.
Prentice, an'--"

"Mrs. who?" interrupted Taylor.

"Mrs. Prentice, wife of th' Third Assistant Secretary. She comes down
often when her husband is working late, but last night he must have gone
home just before she got there, for she came back a few minutes later
and said that the office was dark."

Whatever Taylor's thoughts were at the moment he kept them to
himself--for Prentice was the man from whose safe the cipher key had
been abstracted!

So he contented himself with inquiring whether the watchman was certain
that the woman who entered the building was Mrs. Prentice.

"Shure an' I'm certain," was the reply. "I've seen her and that green
evening cape of hers trimmed with fur too often not to know her."

"Do you know how long it was between the time that she entered the
building and the time she left?" persisted Taylor.

"That I do not, sir. Time is something that you don't worry about much
when it's a matter of guarding the door to a building--particularly at
night. But I'd guess somewhere about five or ten minutes?"

"Rather long for her to make her way to the office of her husband, find
he wasn't there, and come right back, wasn't it?"

"Yes, sir--but you must remember I wasn't countin' the minutes, so to
speak. Maybe it was only three--maybe it was ten. Anyhow, it was just
nine-thirty when she left. I remember looking at the clock when she went
out."

From the watchman's house, located well over in the northeastern section
of the city, Taylor made his way to Madelaine James's apartment on
Connecticut Avenue, discovering that young lady on the point of setting
off to keep a luncheon engagement.

"I won't keep you a minute, Madelaine," promised the Secret Service
operative. "Just want to ask what you know about Mrs. Mahlon Prentice?"

"Wife of the Third Assistant Secretary of State?"

Taylor nodded.

"She's a Chicago woman, I believe. Came here a couple of years ago when
her husband received his appointment. Rather good-looking and very
popular. I happened to be at a dinner with her last evening and--"

"You what?"

"I was at a dinner at the Westovers' last night," repeated the James
girl, "and Mrs. Prentice was among those present. Looked stunning, too.
What's the trouble?"

"What time was the dinner?" Taylor countered.

"Eight o'clock, but of course it didn't start until nearly
eight-thirty."

"And what time did Mrs. Prentice leave?"

"A few minutes after I did. She was just going up for her wraps as I
came downstairs at eleven o'clock."

"You are certain that she was there all evening--that she didn't slip
out for half an hour or so?"

"Of course I'm sure, Mell," the girl replied, a trace of petulance in
her voice. "Why all the questions? Do you suspect the wife of the Third
Assistant Secretary of State of robbing a bank?"

"Not a bank," Taylor admitted, "but it happens that the safe in her
husband's office was opened last night and a highly important slip of
paper abstracted. What's more, the watchman on duty in the building is
ready to swear that Mrs. Prentice came in shortly before nine-thirty,
and went out some five or ten minutes later, stating that her husband
had evidently finished his work and left."

"That's impossible! No matter what the watchman says, there are a score
of people who dined with Mrs. Prentice last evening and who know that
she didn't leave the Westovers' until after eleven. Dinner wasn't over
by nine-thirty, and she couldn't have gotten to the State Department and
back in less than twenty minutes at the inside. It's ridiculous, that's
all!"

"But the watchman!" exclaimed Taylor. "He knows Mrs. Prentice and says
he couldn't miss that green-and-fur coat of hers in the dark. Besides,
she spoke to him as she was leaving."

Madelaine James was silent for a moment, and a tiny frown appeared
between her eyes, evidence of the fact that she was doing some deep
thinking.

Then: "Of course she spoke! Anyone who would go to the trouble of
copying Mrs. Prentice's distinctive cloak would realize that some
additional disguise was necessary. Last night, if you remember, was
quite cold. Therefore it would be quite natural that the woman who
impersonated Mrs. Prentice should have her collar turned up around her
face and probably a drooping hat as well. The collar, in addition to
concealing her features, would muffle her voice, while the watchman, not
suspecting anything, would take it for granted that the green cloak was
worn by the wife of the Under Secretary--particularly when she spoke to
him in passing."

"You mean, then, that some one deliberately impersonated Mrs. Prentice
and took a chance on getting past the watchman merely because she wore a
cloak of the same color?"

"The same color--the same style--practically the same coat," argued Miss
James. "What's more, any woman who would have the nerve to try that
would probably watch Prentice's office from the outside, wait for the
light to go out, and then stage her visit not more than five minutes
later, so's to make it appear plausible. How was the safe opened?"

"Stethoscope. Placed the cup on the outside, and then listened to the
tumblers as they fell. Simplest thing in the world with an antiquated
box like that."

"What's missing?"

By this time Taylor felt that their positions had been reversed. He, who
had come to question, was now on the witness stand, while Madelaine
James was doing the cross-examining. But he didn't mind. He knew the way
the girl's mind worked, quickly and almost infallibly--her knowledge of
women in general and Washington society in particular making her an
invaluable ally in a case like this.

"A slip of paper some six inches long and two inches wide," he said,
with a smile. "The key to the Carruthers Code, probably the most
efficient cipher in the world, but now rendered worthless unless the
original slip is located before it reaches some foreign power."

"Right!" snapped Miss James. "Get busy on your end of the matter. See
what you can find out concerning this mysterious woman in the green
cloak. I'll work along other and what you would probably call strictly
unethical lines. I've got what a man would term a 'hunch,' but in a
woman it is 'intuition'--and therefore far more likely to be right. See
you later!" and with that she was off toward her car.

"But what about your luncheon engagement?" Taylor called after her.

"Bother lunch," she laughed back over her shoulder. "If my hunch is
right I'll make your chief pay for my meals for the next year!"

The next that Taylor heard from his ally was a telephone call on the
following evening, instructing him to dig up his evening clothes and to
be present at a certain reception that evening.

"I have reason to believe," said Madelaine's voice, "that the lady of
the second green cloak will be present. Anyhow, there'll be several of
your friends there--including myself, Mrs. Armitage, and an ambassador
who doesn't stand any too well with the Administration. In fact, I have
it on good authority that he's on the verge of being recalled. Naturally
we don't want him to take a slip of paper, some six inches by two, with
him!"

"How do you know he hasn't it already?"

"He doesn't return from New York until six o'clock this evening, and the
paper is far too valuable to intrust to the mails or to an underling.
Remember, I'm not certain that it is he who is supposed to get the paper
eventually, but I do know who impersonated Mrs. Prentice, and I likewise
know that the lady in question has not communicated with any foreign
official in person. Beyond that we'll have to take a chance on the
evening's developments," and the receiver was replaced before Taylor
could frame any one of the score of questions he wanted to ask.

Even at the reception that night he was unable to get hold of Madelaine
James long enough to find out just what she did know. In fact, it was
nearly midnight before he caught the signal that caused him to enter one
of the smaller and rather secluded rooms apart from the main hall.

There he found a tableau that was totally unexpected.

In one corner of the room, her back against the wall and her teeth bared
in a snarl which distorted her usually attractive features into a mask
of hate, stood Mrs. Armitage. Her hands were crossed in front of her in
what appeared to be an unnatural attitude until Taylor caught a glimpse
of polished steel and realized that the woman had been handcuffed.

"There," announced Madelaine, "in spite of your friend the watchman,
stands 'Mrs. Prentice.' You'll find the green cloak in one of the
closets at her home, and the stethoscope is probably concealed somewhere
around the house. However, that doesn't matter. The main thing is that
we have discovered the missing slip of paper. You'll find it on the
table over there."

Taylor followed the girl's gesture toward a table at the side of the
room. But there, instead of the cipher key that he had expected, he saw
only--a gold bracelet!

"What's the idea?" he demanded. "Where's the paper?"

"Snap open the bracelet," directed the girl. "What do you see?"

"It looks like--by gad! it is!--a tightly wrapped spindle of paper!" and
a moment later the original of the Carruthers Code reposed safely in the
Secret Service agent's vest pocket. As he tossed the empty bracelet back
on the table he heard a sound behind him and turned just in time to see
the woman in the corner slip to the floor in a dead faint.

"Now that we've got her," inquired Madelaine James, "what'll we do with
her?"

"Take off the handcuffs, leave the room, and close the door," directed
Taylor. "She'll hardly care to make any fuss when she comes to, and the
fact that she is unconscious gives us an excellent opportunity for
departing without a scene."

"But what I'd like to know," he asked, as they strolled back toward the
main ballroom, "is how you engineered the affair?"

"I told you I had an intuition," came the reply, "and you laughed at me.
Yes you did, too! It wasn't apparent on your face, but I could feel that
inside yourself you were saying, 'Just another fool idea.' But Mrs.
Armitage was preying on my mind. I didn't like the way she had slipped
one over on us in connection with the leak on the peace note. Then, too,
she seemed to have no visible means of support, but plenty of money.

"I felt certain that she wasn't guilty of blackmail or any of the more
sordid kinds of crime, but the fact that she was on terms of familiarity
with a number of diplomats, and that she seemed to have a fondness for
army and navy officials, led me to believe that she was a sort of super
spy, sent over here for a specific purpose. The instant you mentioned
the Carruthers Code she sprang to my mind. A bill, slipped into the
fingers of her maid, brought the information about the green cloak, and
the rest was easy.

"I figured that she'd have the cipher key on her to-night, for it was
her first opportunity of passing it along to the man I felt certain she
was working for. Sure enough, as she passed him about half an hour ago
she tapped her bracelet, apparently absent-mindedly. As soon as he was
out of sight I sent one of the maids with a message that some one wanted
to see her in one of the smaller rooms. Thinking that it was the
ambassador, she came at once. I was planted behind the door, handcuffed
her before she knew what I was doing, and then signaled you!

"Quite elementary, my dear Melville, quite elementary!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That," added Quinn, "was the last they heard of Mrs. Armitage. Taylor
reported the matter at once, but the chief said that as they had the
code they better let well enough alone. The following day the woman left
Washington, and no one has heard from her since--except for a package
that reached Taylor some months later. There was nothing in it except
that photograph yonder, and, as Taylor was interested only in his bride,
_née_ Madelaine James, he turned it over to me for my collection."




XXIV

FIVE INCHES OF DEATH


"Quinn," I said one evening when the veteran of the United States Secret
Service appeared to be in one of his story-spinning moods, "you've told
me of cases that have to do with smuggling and spies, robberies and
fingerprints and frauds, but you've never mentioned the one crime that
is most common in the annals of police courts and detective bureaus."

"Murder?" inquired Quinn, his eyes shifting to the far wall of his
library-den.

"Precisely. Haven't government detectives ever been instrumental in
solving a murder mystery?"

"Yes, they've been mixed up in quite a few of them. There was the little
matter of the Hallowell case--where the crime and the criminal were
connected by a shoelace--and the incident of 'The Red Circle.' But
murder, as such, does not properly belong in the province of the
government detective. Only when it is accompanied by some breach of the
federal laws does it come under the jurisdiction of the men from
Washington. Like the Montgomery murder mystery, for example."

"Oh yes, the one connected with the postmark that's framed on your wall
over there!" I exclaimed. "I'd forgotten about that. Hal Preston handled
it, didn't he--the same man responsible for running down 'The Trail of
the White Mice'?"

"That's the one," said Quinn, and I was glad to see him settle
luxuriously back in his old armchair--for that meant that he was
preparing to recall the details of an adventure connected with a member
of one of the government detective services.

       *       *       *       *       *

If it hadn't been for the fact that Preston was in California at the
time, working on the case of a company that was using the mails for
illegal purposes, it is extremely doubtful if the mystery would ever
have been solved [Quinn continued]; certainly not in time to prevent the
escape of the criminal.

But Hal's investigations took him well up into the foot-hills of the
Sierra Nevadas, and one morning he awoke to find the whole town in which
he was stopping ablaze with a discussion of the "Montgomery mystery," as
they called it.

It appeared from the details which Preston picked up in the lobby of his
hotel that Marshall Montgomery had settled down in that section of the
country some three years before, but that he had surrounded himself with
an air of aloofness and detachment which had made him none too popular.
Men who had called to see him on matters of business had left smarting
under the sting of an ill-concealed snub, while it was as much as a book
agent's life was worth to try to gain entrance to the house.

"It wasn't that he was stingy or close-fisted," explained one of the men
who had known Montgomery. "He bought more Liberty Bonds than anyone else
in town--but he bought them through his bank. Mailed the order in, just
as he did with his contributions to the Red Cross and the other
charitable organizations. Wouldn't see one of the people who went out to
his place. In fact, they couldn't get past the six or eight bulldogs
that guard the house."

"And yet," said Preston, "I understand that in spite of his precautions
he was killed last night?"

"Nobody knows just when he was killed," replied the native, "or how.
That's the big question. When his servant, a Filipino whom he brought
with him, went to wake him up this morning he found Montgomery's door
locked. That in itself was nothing unusual--for every door and window in
the place was securely barred before nine o'clock in the evening. But
when Tino, the servant, had rapped several times without receiving any
reply, he figured something must be wrong. So he got a stepladder,
propped it up against the side of the house, and looked in through the
window. What he saw caused him to send in a hurry call for the police."

"Well," snapped Preston, "what did he see?"

"Montgomery, stretched out on the floor near the door, stone dead--with
a pool of blood that had formed from a wound in his hand!"

"In his hand?" Preston echoed. "Had he bled to death?"

"Apparently not--but that's where the queer angle to the case comes in.
The door was locked from the inside--not only locked, but bolted, so
there was no possibility of anyone having entered the room. The windows
were tightly guarded by a patented burglar-proof device which permitted
them to be open about three inches from the bottom, but prevented their
being raised from the outside."

"Was there a chimney or any other possible entrance to the room?"

"None at all. Three windows and a door. Montgomery's body was sprawled
out on the rug near the doorway--a revolver in his right hand, a bullet
hole through the palm of his left. The first supposition, of course,
was that he had accidentally shot himself and had bled to death. But
there wasn't enough blood for that. Just a few drops on the table and a
small pool near the body. They're going to hold an autopsy later in the
day and--"

It was at that moment that the Post-office operative became conscious
that some one was calling his name, and, turning, he beckoned to the
bell-boy who was paging him.

"Mr. Preston? Gentleman over there'd like to speak to you." Then the boy
added in a whisper, "Chief o' police."

Excusing himself, Preston crossed the lobby to where a large and
official-looking man was standing, well out of hearing distance of the
guests who passed.

"Is this Mr. Preston of the Postal Inspection Service?" inquired the
head of the local police force, adding, after the government operative
had nodded. "I am the chief of police here."

"Glad to meet you, Chief," was Preston's response. "I haven't had the
pleasure of making your acquaintance, though of course I know you by
sight." (He neglected to add how recently this knowledge had been
acquired.) "What can I do for you?"

"Have you heard about the murder of Montgomery Marshall?"

"Only the few details that I picked up in the lobby just now. But a case
of that kind is entirely out of my line, you know."

"Ordinarily it would be," agreed the other, "but here's something that I
think puts a different complexion on things," and he extended a
bloodstained scrap of paper for Preston to examine.

"That was found under the dead man's hand," the chief continued. "As you
will note, it originally formed part of the wrapping of a
special-delivery parcel which reached Montgomery about eight o'clock
last night--just before the house was locked up, in fact. Tino, the
Filipino servant, signed for it and took it in, placing it upon the
table in the room in which his master was found this morning. The scrap
of paper you are holding is just enough to show the postmark
'Sacramento'--but it's quite evident that the package had something to
do with the murder."

"Which is the reason that you want me to look into it, eh?"

"That's the idea. I knew that you were in town, and the very fact that
this box came through the mails makes it necessary for the Post-office
Department to take cognizance of what otherwise would be a job for the
police force alone. Am I right?"

"Perfectly," replied Preston. "Provided you have reason to believe that
there was some connection between the special-delivery package and the
crime itself. What was in the box?"

"Not a thing!"

"What?"

"Not a thing!" repeated the chief. "Perfectly empty--at least when we
found it. The lid was lying on the table, the rest of the box on the
floor. The major portion of the wrapping paper had been caught under a
heavy paper weight and it appears that Montgomery, in falling, caught at
the table to save himself and probably ripped away the scrap of paper I
have just given you."

"But I thought his body was found near the door?"

"It was, but that isn't far from the table, which is jammed against the
wall in front of one of the windows. Come on up to the house with me
and we'll go over the whole thing."

Glad of the excuse to look into a crime which appeared to be
inexplicable, Preston accompanied the chief to the frame dwelling on the
outskirts of town where Montgomery Marshall, hermit, had spent the last
three years of his life.

The house was set well back from the road, with but a single gateway in
a six-foot wall of solid masonry, around the top of which ran several
strands of barbed wire.

"Montgomery erected the wall himself," explained the chief. "Had it put
up before he ever moved into the house, and then, in addition, kept a
bunch of the fiercest dogs I ever knew."

"All of which goes to prove that he feared an attack," Preston muttered.
"In spite of his precautions, however, they got him! The question now
is: Who are 'they' and how did they operate?"

The room in which the body had been found only added to the air of
mystery which surrounded the entire problem.

In spite of what he had been told Preston had secretly expected to find
some kind of an opening through which a man could have entered. But
there was none. The windows, as the Postal operative took care to test
for himself, were tightly locked, though open a few inches from the
bottom. The bolt on the door very evidently had been shattered by the
entrance of the police, and the dark-brown stain on the rug near the
door showed plainly where the body had been found.

"When we broke in," explained the chief, "Montgomery was stretched out
there, facing the door. The doctor said that he had been dead about
twelve hours, but that it was impossible for the wound in his hand to
have caused his death."

"How about a poisoned bullet, fired through the opening in the window?"

"Not a chance! The only wound on the body was the one through the palm
of his hand. The bullet had struck on the outside of the fleshy part
near the wrist and had plowed its way through the bone, coming out near
the base of the index finger at the back. And it was a bullet from his
own revolver! We found it embedded in the top of the table there." And
the chief pointed to a deep scar in the mahogany and to the marks made
by the knives of the police when they had dug the bullet out.

"But how do you know it wasn't a bullet of the same caliber, fired from
outside the window?" persisted Preston.

For answer the chief produced Montgomery's revolver, with five
cartridges still in the chambers.

"If you'll note," he said, "each of these cartridges is scored or
seamed. That's an old trick--makes the lead expand when it hits and
tears an ugly hole, just like a 'dum-dum.' The bullet we dug out of the
table was not only a forty-five, as these are, but it had been altered
in precisely the same manner. So, unless you are inclined to the
coincidence that the murderer used a poisoned bullet of the same size
and make and character as those in Montgomery's gun, you've got to
discard that theory."

"Does look like pulling the long arm of coincidence out of its socket,"
Preston agreed. "So I guess we'll have to forget it. Where's the box you
were talking about?"

"The lid is on the table, just as we found it. The lower portion of the
box is on the floor, where the dead man apparently knocked it when he
fell. Except for the removal of the body, nothing in the room has been
touched."

Stooping, Preston picked up the box and then proceeded to study it in
connection with the lid and the torn piece of wrapping paper upon the
table. It was after he had examined the creases in the paper, fitting
them carefully around the box itself, that he inquired: "Do you notice
anything funny about the package, Chief?"

"Only that there's a hole at one end of it, just about big enough to put
a lead pencil through."

"Yes, and that same hole appears in the wrapping paper," announced
Preston. "Couple that with the fact that the box was empty when you
found it and I think we will have--"

"What?" demanded the chief, as Preston paused.

"The solution to the whole affair," was the reply. "Or, at least, as
much of it as refers to the manner in which Montgomery met his death. By
the way, what do you know about the dead man?"

"Very little. He came here some three years ago, bought this place,
paying cash for it; had the wall built, and then settled down. Never
appeared to do any work, but was never short of money. Has a balance of
well over fifty thousand dollars in the bank right now. Beyond the fact
that he kept entirely to himself and refused to allow anyone but Tino,
his servant, to enter the gate, he really had few eccentricities. Some
folks say that he was a miser, but there are a dozen families here that
wouldn't have had any Christmas dinner last year if it hadn't been for
him--while his contribution to the Red Cross equaled that of anyone in
town."

"Apart from his wanting to be alone, then, he was pretty close to being
human?"

"That's it, exactly--and most of us have some peculiarity. If we didn't
have we'd be even more unusual."

"What about Tino, the servant?" queried Preston.

"I don't think there's any lead there," the chief replied. "I hammered
away at him for an hour this morning. He doesn't speak English any too
well, but I gathered that Montgomery picked him up in the Philippines
just before he came over here. The boy was frightened half out of his
senses when I told him that his master had been killed. You've got to
remember, though, that if Tino had wanted to do it he had a thousand
opportunities in the open. Besides, what we've got to find out first is
how Montgomery met his death?"

"Does the Filipino know anything about his master's past?" asked
Preston, ignoring the chief's last remark.

"He says not. Montgomery was on his way back to the States from Africa
or some place--stopped off in the islands--spent a couple of months
there--hired Tino and sailed for San Francisco."

"Africa--" mused the Postal operative. Then, taking another track, he
inquired whether the chief had found out if Montgomery was in the habit
of getting much mail, especially from foreign points.

"Saunders, the postmaster, says he didn't average a letter a month--and
those he did get looked like advertisements. They remembered this
special-delivery package last night because it was the first time that
the man who brought it out had ever come to the house. He rang the bell
at the gate, he says, turned the box over to Tino, and went along."

"Any comment about the package?"

"Only that it was very light and contained something that wabbled
around. I asked him because I figured at the time that the revolver
might have been in it. But the Filipino has identified that as
Montgomery's own gun. Says he'd had it as long as he'd known him."

"Then all we know about this mysterious box," summarized Preston, "is
that it was mailed from Sacramento, that it wasn't heavy, that it had a
hole about a quarter-inch wide at one end, and that it contained
something that--what was the word the special-delivery man
used--'wabbled'?"

"That's the word. I remember because I asked him if he didn't mean
'rattled,' and he said, 'No, wabbled, sort o' dull-like.'"

"At any rate, that clears up one angle of the case. The box was not
empty when it was delivered! Granting that the Filipino was telling the
truth, it was not empty when he placed it on the table in this room!
That means that it was not empty when Marshall Montgomery, after locking
and bolting his door, took off the wrapping paper and lifted the lid!
You've searched the room thoroughly, of course?"

"Every inch of it. We didn't leave a--"

But the chief suddenly halted, his sentence unfinished. To the ears of
both men there had come a sound, faint but distinct. The sound of the
rattling of paper somewhere in the room.

Involuntarily Preston whirled and scrutinized the corner from which the
sound appeared to have come. The chief's hand had slipped to his hip
pocket, but after a moment of silence he withdrew it and a slightly
shamefaced look spread over his face.

"Sounded like a ghost, didn't it?" he asked.

"Ghosts don't rattle papers," snapped Preston. "At least self-respecting
ones don't, and the other kind haven't any right to run around loose. So
suppose we try to trap this one."

"Trap it? How?"

"Like you'd trap a mouse--only with a different kind of bait. Is there
any milk in the house?"

"Possibly--I don't know."

"Go down to the refrigerator and find out, will you? I'll stay here
until you return. And bring a saucer with you."

A few moments later, when the chief returned, bearing a bottle of milk
and a saucer, he found Preston still standing beside the table, his eyes
fixed upon a corner of the room from which the sound of rattling paper
had come.

"Now all we need is a box," said the Postal operative. "I saw one out in
the hall that will suit our purposes excellently."

Securing the box, he cut three long and narrow strips from the sides,
notched them and fitted them together in a rough replica of the figure
4, with the lower point of the upright stick resting on the floor beside
the saucer of milk and the wooden box poised precariously at the
junction of the upright and the slanting stick.

"A figure-four trap, eh?" queried the chief. "What do you expect to
catch?"

"A mixture of a ghost and the figure of Justice," was Preston's
enigmatic reply. "Come on--we'll lock the door and return later to see
if the trap has sprung. Meanwhile, I'll send some wires to Sacramento,
San Francisco, and other points throughout the state."

The telegram, of which he gave a copy to the local chief of police, "in
order to save the expense of sending it," read:

     Wire immediately if you know anything of recent arrival from
     Africa--probably American or English--who landed within past
     three days. Wanted in connection with Montgomery murder.

The message to San Francisco ended with the phrase "Watch outgoing boats
closely," and that to Sacramento "Was in your city yesterday."

Hardly an hour later the phone rang and a voice from police
headquarters in Sacramento asked to speak to "Postal Inspector Preston."

"Just got your wire," said the voice, "and I think we've got your man.
Picked him up on the street last night, unconscious. Hospital people say
he's suffering from poisoning of some kind and don't expect him to live.
Keeps raving about diamonds and some one he calls 'Marsh.' Papers on him
show he came into San Francisco two days ago on the _Manu_. Won't tell
his name, but has mentioned Cape Town several times."

"Right!" cried Preston. "Watch him carefully until I get there. I'll
make the first train out."

That afternoon Preston, accompanied by two chiefs of police, made his
way into a little room off the public ward in the hospital in
Sacramento. In bed, his face drawn and haggard until the skin seemed
like parchment stretched tightly over his cheekbones, lay a man at the
point of death--a man who was only kept alive, according to the
physicians, by some almost superhuman effort of the will.

"It's certain that he's been poisoned," said the doctor in charge of the
case, "but he won't tell us how. Just lies there and glares and demands
a copy of the latest newspaper. Every now and then he drifts off into
delirium, but just when we think he's on the point of death he
recovers."

Motioning to the others to keep in the background, Preston made his way
to the bedside of the dying man. Then, bending forward, he said, very
clearly and distinctly: "Marshall Montgomery is dead!"

Into the eyes of the other man there sprang a look of concentrated
hatred that was almost tangible--a glare that turned, a moment later,
into supreme relief.

"Thank God!" he muttered. "Now I'm ready to die!"

"Tell me," said Preston, quietly--"tell me what made you do it."

"He did!" gasped the man on the bed. "He and his damned brutality. When
I knew him his name was Marsh. We dug for diamonds together in South
Africa--found them, too--enough to make us both rich for life. But our
water was running low--barely enough for one of us. He, the skunk, hit
me over the head and left me to die--taking the water and the stones
with him."

He paused a moment, his breath rattling in his throat, and then
continued:

"It took me five years to find him--but you say he's dead? You're not
lying?"

Preston shook his head slowly and the man on the bed settled back and
closed his eyes, content.

"Ask him," insisted the chief of police, "how he killed Montgomery?"

In a whisper that was barely audible came the words: "Sheep-stinger. Got
me first." Then his jaws clicked and there was the unmistakable gurgle
which meant that the end had come.

"Didn't he say 'sheep-stinger'?" asked the chief of police, after the
doctor had stated that the patient had slipped away from the hands of
the law.

"That's what it sounded like to me," replied Preston. "But suppose we go
back to Montgomery's room and see what our ghost trap has caught. I told
you I expected to land a figure of Justice--and if ever a man deserved
to be killed it appears to have been this same Montgomery Marshall, or
Marsh, as this man knew him."

The instant they entered the room it was apparent that the trap had
sprung, the heavy box falling forward and completely covering the saucer
of milk and whatever had disturbed the carefully balanced sticks.

Warning the chief to be careful, Preston secured a poker from an
adjoining room, covered the box with his automatic, and then carefully
lifted the box, using the poker as a lever.

A second later he brought the head of the poker down on something that
writhed and twisted and then lay still, blending in with the pattern of
the carpet in such a manner as to be almost invisible.

"A snake!" cried the chief. "But such a tiny one! Do you mean to say
that its bite is sufficiently poisonous to kill a man?"

"Not only one, but two," Preston declared, "as you've seen for yourself.
See that black mark, like an inverted V, upon the head? That's
characteristic of the cobra family, and this specimen--common to the
veldts of South Africa where he is known as the 'sheep stinger'--is
first cousin to the big king cobras. Montgomery's former partner
evidently brought him over from Africa with this idea in mind. But when
he was packing him in the box--the airhole in the end of it gave me the
first inkling, by the way--he got careless and the snake bit him. Only
medical attention saved his life until this afternoon, else he'd have
passed along before Montgomery. I think that closes the case, Chief, and
in spite of the fact that the mails were used for a distinctly illegal
purpose, I believe your department ought to handle the matter--not
mine."

"But the trap--the milk? How'd you happen to hit on that?"

"When you told me what the special-delivery man said about the contents
of the package 'wabbling' I figured that the box must have contained a
snake," explained the Postal operative. "An animal would have made some
noise, while a snake, if well fed, will lie silent for hours at a time.
The constant motion, however, would have made it irritable--so that it
struck the moment Montgomery removed the lid of the box. That explains
the wound in his hand. He knew his danger and deliberately fired, hoping
to cauterize the wound and drive out the poison. It was too quick for
him, though, or possibly the shock stunned him so that he fell.

"Then, in spite of the fact that your men claimed to have searched the
room thoroughly, that noise in the corner warned me that whatever killed
Montgomery was still here. Going on the theory that the majority of
snakes are fond of milk, I rigged up the trap. And there you are!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes," concluded Quinn, "the majority of the cases handled by government
detectives have to do with counterfeiting or smuggling or other crimes
against the federal law--offenses which ought to be exciting but which
are generally dull and prosaic. Every now and then, though, they stumble
across a real honest-to-goodness thrill, a story that's worth the
telling.

"I've got to be away for the next couple of months or so, but drop
around when I get back and I'll see if I can't recall some more of the
problems that have been solved by one of the greatest, though least
known, detective agencies on the face of the earth."


                    THE END


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Contents page changes made to agree with chapter headings:
"Lost--$100,000!"--quotes and exclamation point added. "The Double
Code"--quotes added. "Thirty Thousand," and again on P. 253--hyphen
removed (more frequent without).

After Contents page, "On Secret Service" displays twice--once alone on
a page, and again above the Chapter I heading. One of the redundancies
has been deleted.

Missing or incorrect punctuation repaired.

Spelling errors fixed.

Hyphenation variants changed to most frequently used version.

P. 54 "Simpson lives" original reads "Simpson lived."

P. 58 Thought break added for consistency.

P. 89 "Douglass" changed to more frequently used "Douglas."

P. 177 Code table: Original shows first number under q as "19."
Corrected to "17."

P. 198 "well dressed" changed to "well-dressed."

P. 221 two occurrences of "blonde" changed to more frequently used
"blond."

Abbreviations "sub." and "ad." in original retained.

"Charleston" and "Charlestown," "down town" and "downtown" (used
equally), "everyone" and "every one [of]," "résumé" (for summary) and
"resume" (for assume anew), "loath" (for unwilling) and "loathe" (for
abhor), "mix-up" and "mixup" (used equally), "anyone" and "any one" (a
single, particular one) were used in this text and retained.

Also retained "flivvered" (P. 104).





End of Project Gutenberg's On Secret Service, by William Nelson Taft

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON SECRET SERVICE ***

***** This file should be named 38131-8.txt or 38131-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/1/3/38131/

Produced by David Edwards, JoAnn Greenwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
