The Project Gutenberg EBook of United States Government Publications, v. 8
 Jan-Jun 1892, by Compiled

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: United States Government Publications, v. 8  Jan-Jun 1892
       A Monthly Catalog

Author: Compiled

Editor: John H. Hickcox

Release Date: June 20, 2011 [EBook #36471]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






VOL. VIII.    1892.    NOS. 1-7.

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

Monthly Catalogue.

JOHN H. HICKCOX, Editor.

WASHINGTON, D.C. W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO. PUBLISHERS.




Transcriber's Note: Printer's inconsistencies in spelling, punctuation,
and hyphenation have been retained.

Characters with macrons are indicated by being preceded by an equal
sign and enclosed in brackets, e.g., [=e].

A caret (^) is used to indicate that the character following it is
printed as superscript, e.g., 4^o.




NOTICE.


We will endeavor to supply any of the publications named in this or
previous issues of this Catalogue. In some cases the prices are given.
Where they are omitted a reasonable charge will be made for the time
and expense incurred in procuring such items as may be called for. In
ordering, care should be taken to give title as fully as convenient.

W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO.,

WASHINGTON, D.C.

1424-1426 F ST.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

A MONTHLY CATALOGUE.


JOHN H. HICKCOX, Editor.

VOL. VIII. 1892.

WASHINGTON, D.C. W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO. 1892.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., JANUARY, 1892.    No. 1.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.


This Catalogue contains the titles of all the current official
publications of the United States, including the reports and papers
issued by Departments, Bureaus, Commissions, and other organizations of
the Government; all the documents printed by order of Congress--that is
to say, the Executive Documents, Reports of Committees, Miscellaneous
Documents, Journals, and Debates of both Houses; and in addition, the
titles of all public Acts, Treaties, and Maps.

The arrangement of the titles is alphabetical, under authors' names as
regards special treatises, and under topics as regards Congressional
documents. At the same time the Departments, Bureaus, Commissions,
etc., are credited with the works issued under their supervision. A
valuable feature of the work consists in the separate entry of every
paper or contribution contained in Reports, Bulletins, or other
publications of the Government. A general Index at the end of the
volume.

Subscription price $5.00 per annum.


_Note_: All correspondence relating to the Catalogue or to the
publications of the United States Government should be addressed to the
publishers,

W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO., 1424-1426 F STREET, WASHINGTON, D.C.


We beg to announce that we have purchased all the rights in this
periodical, and will issue it hereafter regularly and promptly early in
each month. Mr. Hickcox will compile and edit the work as heretofore,
and no change will be made in its general character. As rapidly as the
matter can be prepared we shall print all the numbers necessary to
complete the back volumes and send them to the subscribers of those
volumes.

The importance of this catalogue as a systematic and accurate record of
the vast, varied, and important number of books and documents issued
annually by Congress and the Departments must be apparent to every
person who has occasion to consult such publications. The irregularity
of its appearance in the past was due to want of support sufficient to
pay its working expenses, and we trust that such reason may not again
discourage its prompt appearance, or worse, its discontinuance
entirely. The enterprise is not likely to prove very remunerative, but
we hope at least to command enough patronage to repay the actual outlay
of money.

W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO.


The above announcement will be gratifying to the patrons of this
publication. The undersigned desires to congratulate those who having
been loyal under adverse circumstances have at last a guarantee that
the catalogue will hereafter reach them regularly, and that the
unfinished volumes will be speedily completed. The seven years of hard,
but unsuccessful, labor are in a measure redeemed through the
enterprise, intelligence, and liberality of Messrs. Lowdermilk & Co. It
is earnestly requested that former subscribers will promptly and
cordially co-operate with the new publishers in supplying the key, and
the only key to the varied and comprehensive publications of the United
States government.

J. H. HICKCOX.




CATALOGUE.

JANUARY, 1892.

_Note_: The publications described in this number are octavo in size,
unless otherwise mentioned.


ABBE, CLEVELAND. Report on the international conference of
meteorologists in Munich. August, 1891. 6pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 626-631.


ABBOTT, D. P., and or's. Report from the committee on claims favoring
bill for the relief of D. P. Abbott and others, sureties. February 5,
1892. 9pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 61; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- JOHN T., _U.S. Minister._ Trade with the San Blas coast. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 217-222.


---- W. L. Descriptive catalogue of the Abbott collection of
ethnological objects from Kilima-Njaro, East Africa. From report of the
Nat. Mus. 1891, pp. 1-50. Washington, 1892. 52pp.


ADAMS, EPHRAIM D. The historical development of the budget in the
United States. (Abstract.) 1p.

    Am. Hist. Ass'n rep. 1890, p. 81.


---- HENRY C. Transportation on railways in group vii. Statistics for
the ten years ended 1889. 4^o. 14pp.

    U.S. Census 1890; Bulletin, no. 160.

---- Transportation on railways in group viii. Statistics for the ten
years ending 1889. 4^o. 15pp.

    U.S. Census 1890; Bulletin, no. 164.

---- Transportation of railways in group ix and x. Statistics for the
ten years ending 1889. 4^o. 15+14pp.

    U.S. Census 1890; Bulletin, nos. 171-172.


---- HERBERT B., _Editor._ Contributions to American educational
history, No. 10. Higher education in Indiana. By J. A. Woodburn.
Washington, 1891. 200pp., 32 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information, no.
    1, 1891.

---- _Same._ No. 11. Higher education in Michigan. By A. C. McLaughlin.
Washington, 1891. 178pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information, no.
    4, 1891.

---- _Same._ No. 12. Higher education in Ohio. By G. W. Knight and J.
R. Commons. Washington, 1891. 258pp., 44 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information, no.
    5, 1891.

---- _Same._ No. 13. Higher education in Massachusetts. By G. G. Bush.
Washington, 1891. 445pp., 33 pls.
                                                           1.25

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information, no.
    6, 1891.


ADAMSON, THOMAS, Consul-General. The Panama railroad. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports, no. 137, pp. 274-277.


AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE. Memorial of Friends against. December 15, 1891.
1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES. Letter from the Secretary of the Interior
relative to action under the law to apply a portion of the proceeds of
the public lands to the support of agricultural colleges. March 17,
1892. 4pp.

    Sen. ex doc. no. 59; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT. Report of the Secretary of Agriculture, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 59pp.
                                                            .25

---- Report of the Secretary of Agriculture. 1891. Washington, 1892.
653pp., 58 pls., 2 maps.
                                                           1.00

    CONTENTS.

    Report of the Secretary of agriculture.
    Special report of the assistant Secretary.
    Report of the chief of the bureau of animal industry.
    Report of the chemist.
    Report of the chief of the division of forestry.
    Report of the entomologist.
    Report of the ornithologist and mammalogist.
    Report of the statistician.
    Report of the botanist.
    Report of the chief of the division of vegetable pathology.
    Report of the pomologist.
    Report of the microscopist.
    Report of the special agent in charge of the fiber investigation.
    Report of the special agent in charge of the artesian and underflow
      investigations, and of the irrigation inquiry.
    Report of the chief of the seed division.
    Report of the superintendent of garden and grounds.
    Report of the chief of the division of illustrations.
    Report of the chief of the division of records and editing.
    Report of the superintendent of the document and folding room.
    Report of the director of the office of experiment stations.
    Report of the chief of the weather bureau.

---- Special report of the assistant Secretary upon the coöperation of
the Department of Agriculture with the educational forces in the United
States relating to agriculture. Washington, 1892. 20pp.

---- Recent facts regarding the ramie industry in America, with brief
statements relating to manufacture in Europe, etc. By C. R. Dodge.
Washington, 1891. 16pp.
                                                            .10

---- Report of the special agent in charge of the fiber investigations.
Washington, 1892. 24pp., 2 pls., 11 cuts.
                                                            .25

---- Report of the special agent in charge of the artesian and
underflow investigations, and of the irrigation inquiry. 1891. 15pp.,
map.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 439-450.

---- A report on irrigation and the cultivation of the soil thereby,
with physical data, conditions, and progress within the U.S. for 1891.
By R. J. Hinton. Part 1. Washington, 1892. 459pp., 50 pls.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 41, part 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Artesian and underflow investigation. Final report of the chief
engineer, E. S. Nettleton, to the Secretary of Agriculture. Part 2.
Washington, 1892. 116pp., 5 fold. l., 24 plates.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 41, part 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Final geological reports of the artesian and underflow
investigation between the 97th meridian of longitude and the foot-hills
of the Rocky Mountains, to the Secretary of Agriculture. By Prof. R.
Hay. Part 3. Washington, 1892. 209pp., 19 pls.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 41, part 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Final report on the mid-plains division of the artesian and
underflow investigation between the 97th meridian of longitude west,
and the foot-hills of the Rocky Mountains. By J. W. Gregory. And a
special report on certain artesian conditions in South Dakota. By F. F.
B. Coffin. Part 4. Washington, 1892. 61pp., 8 pls.
                                              4 parts for $3.00

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 41, part 4; 52 Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on printing, in the matter of printing
the final report of artesian and underflow investigation. February 17,
1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 243; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on agriculture to accompany bill (H.R.
6836) to supply deficiencies in fund for the inspection of cattle, etc.
March 3, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 519; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés in the Department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified civil service, and who are
not specifically authorized by law. April 12, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 75; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of expenditures for the Department of Agriculture for
the year ending June 30, 1891. 134pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 55; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on agriculture, etc., to accompany bill
(H.R. 9089) making appropriations for the Department of Agriculture for
1892-'93. June 7 and 22, 1892. 2+2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1586, and Sen. rep. no. 827; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Farmers' bulletin no. 5. Treatment of smuts of oats and wheat.
Washington, 1892. 8pp., 1 pl.

---- _Same._ No. 6. Tobacco. Instructions for its cultivation and
curing. By J. M. Estes. Washington, 1892. 8pp.

---- _Same._ No. 7. Spraying fruits for insect pests and fungous
diseases, with a special consideration of the subject in its relation
to the public health. Washington, 1892. 20pp.

---- _Same._ No. 8. Results of experiments with inoculation for the
prevention of hog cholera. By D. E. Salmon. Washington, 1892. 40pp.

---- Bureau of Animal industry. Report of the chief of the bureau of
animal industry, 1891. Washington, 1892. 62pp.

---- ---- Report (Administrative) of the bureau of animal industry for
1891. 129pp.
                                                            .40

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 11; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Sixth and seventh annual reports of the bureau of animal
industry for the years 1889 and 1890. Washington, 1891. 503pp.
                                                           1.00

---- Division of Botany. Annual report of the botanist. 1891.
Washington, 1892. 20pp., 10 pls.

---- ---- Grass and forage experiment station at Garden City, Kansas.
By Dr. J. A. Sewall. Coöperative branch stations in the south. By S. M.
Tracy. Reprinted from the annual report of the Secretary of Agriculture
for 1891. 12pp.

---- ---- Contributions from the U.S. national herbarium. Vol. 2, no.
2. Issued June 1, 1892. Manual of the _phanerogams_ and _pteridophytes_
of western Texas. By J. M. Coulter. _Gamopetalæ._ Washington, 1892. v,
153-345, xpp.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- _Same._ Vol. 3, no. 1. Issued February 25, 1892. Monograph of
the grasses of the United States and British America. By Dr. George
Vasey. Washington, 1892. vi, 1-89, vii-xivpp.
                                                            .75

---- Division of Chemistry. Report of the chief of the division of
chemistry for 1891. Washington, 1892. 52pp.
                                                            .25

    _Note_: Relates to sorghum sugar; sugar beets; sugar bounty; muck
    lands of Florida; natural phosphate deposits; meat preservatives;
    tea, coffee, and cocoa adulterations.

---- ---- Bulletin no. 13, part 6. Foods and food adulterants.
Investigations made under the direction of H. W. Wiley. Part vi. Sugar,
molasses and sirup, confections, honey, and beeswax. Washington, 1892.
2 l., pp. 633-874+ix.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Same._ No. 13, part 7. Foods and food adulterants. Tea,
coffee, and cocoa preparations. By G. L. Spencer and E. E. Ewell.
Washington, 1892. vii, 875-1014, vi pp., plates, 39-47.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Same._ No. 31. Proceedings of the eighth annual convention
of the association of official agricultural chemists held at
Washington, August 13, 14, 15, 1891. Methods of analysis of commercial
fertilizers, foods, and feeding stuffs, dairy products, fermented
liquors, and sugars. Edited by H. W. Wiley. Washington, 1891. 253pp.
                                                            .75

---- ---- _Same._ No. 32. Special report on the extent and character of
food adulterants, including state and other laws relating to foods and
beverages. By A. J. Wedderburn. Washington, 1892. 174pp.
                                                            .50

---- Division of Entomology. Annual report of the entomologist, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 38pp.

---- ---- Bulletin no. 26. Reports of observations and experiments in
the practical work of the division. Washington, 1892. 95pp.
                                                            .35

---- ---- _Same._ No. 27. Reports on the damage by destructive locusts
during the season of 1891. Washington, 1892. 64pp.
                                                            .25

---- ---- _Insect Life._ Periodical bulletin. Vol. iv, nos. 7 and 8.
Issued April, 1892. Washington, 1892. 231-292pp.

---- Division of Forestry. Annual report of the chief of the division,
1891. Washington, 1892. 42pp., 8 pls.
                                                            .25

    _Note_: Poisoning of street trees; Bamboo as a substitute for wood;
    Forest-planting experiments; Southern lumber pines.

---- ---- Bulletin no. 6. Timber physics. Part 1. Preliminary report.
Compiled by B. E. Fernow. Washington, 1892. 4^o. iii, 1-57, ivpp. 6
pls.
                                                            .50

---- Division of Illustrations. Annual report (the 2d), of the chief of
the division, 1891. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 485-87.

---- Division of Microscopy. Annual report (the 20th) of the chief of
the division, 1891. Washington, 1892. 14pp., 9 pls.

    _Note_: Relates to improved methods for distinguishing between pure
    and fictitious lard. Four edible mushrooms.

---- ---- Food products, ii. Eight edible and twelve poisonous
mushrooms of the United States, with directions for the culture and
culinary preparation of the edible species. By T. Taylor, M.D.,
Washington, 1891. 16pp., 6 pls.
                                                            .20

---- Division of Ornithology and Mammalogy. Annual report (the 6th) of
chief of the division, 1891. Washington, 1892. 8pp.

---- Division of Pomology. Annual report (the 6th) of the pomologist.
1891. Washington, 1892. 28pp., 9 col. pls.

---- Division of Records and Editing. Report of the chief of the
division, 1891. By Geo. W. Hill. 12pp. Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891,
pp. 489-498.

---- Division of Seeds. Report of the chief of the division, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 12pp.

---- Division of statistics. Report (the 23d) of the statistician, for
1891. By J. R. Dodge. Washington, 1892. 72+v pp.
                                                            .30

---- ---- Report no. 2. Miscellaneous series. Report on the agriculture
of South America, with maps and latest statistics of trade. By A.
Barnes. Washington, 1892. 189pp., 3 maps.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Report no. 92. New series. Report upon the numbers and values
of farm animals, and on freight rates of transportation companies.
January and February, 1892. Washington, 1892. 44pp.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 93. March, 1892. Report on the distribution and
consumption of corn and wheat, and on freight rates of transportation
companies. Washington, 1892. pp. 45-92.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 94. April, 1892. Washington, 1892. pp. 93-147.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 95. May, 1892. Washington, 1892. pp. 148-198.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 96. June, 1892. Washington, 1892. pp. 199-244.

---- Division of Vegetable Pathology. Annual report of the chief of the
division, 1891. Washington, 1892. 22pp., 3 pls.

---- ---- Bulletin no. 1. Additional evidence on the communicability of
peach yellows and peach rosette. By E. F. Smith. Washington, 1891.
65pp., 39 pls.
                                                            .75

---- ---- Circular no. 11. Circular of inquiry on grape diseases and
their treatment. 1p.

---- ---- Circular no. 12. Circular of inquiry on rust of cereals. 1p.

---- ---- Farmers' Bulletin no. 5. Treatment of smuts of oats and
wheat. [By W. T. Swingle.] Washington, 1892. 8pp., 1 pl.

---- ---- _Journal of Mycology._ Vol. vii, no. 2. Issued March 10,
1892. Washington, 1892. pp. 65-194, pls. 11-17.

---- Office of Experiment Stations. Report of the director of the
office for 1891. Washington, 1892. 38pp., map.
                                                            .20

---- ---- Experiment Station bulletin no. 7. Proceedings of the fifth
annual convention of the Association of American Agricultural colleges
and experiment stations held at Washington August 12-18, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 113pp.
                                                            .40

---- ---- _Same._ No. 8. Six lectures on the investigations at
Rothamsted experimental station delivered under the provisions of the
Lawes agricultural trust by Robert Warington before the Association of
American agricultural colleges and experiment stations at Washington,
D. C, August 12-18, 1891. Washington, 1892. 113pp., 11 pls.
                                                            .75

    CONTENTS.

      I. The Rothamsted experimental station.
     II. The circumstances which determine the rise and fall of
           nitrogenous matter in the soil.
    III. Nitrification.
     IV. Nitrification and denitrification.
      V. Nitrification of soils and manures. VI. Drainage and well
           waters.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 9. The fermentations of milk. By H. W. Conn.
Washington, 1892. 75pp.
                                                            .35

---- ---- _Same._ No. 10. Meteorological work for agricultural
institutions. M. W. Harrington, chief, etc. Washington, 1892. 23pp.
                                                            .20

---- ---- _Experiment Station Record_ [Monthly]. Vol. 3, nos. 6-9,
January-April, 1892. Washington, 1892, pp. 365-664.
                                                           1.00

---- Superintendent of Gardens and Grounds. Annual report for 1891.
Washington, 1892. 24pp., 7 pls.

    _Note_: Contains, Notes on horticultural and kindred subjects; and,
    Trees in cities and on streets.

---- Weather Bureau. Report of the chief of the bureau for [the last
six months of] 1891. By Mark W. Harrington. Washington, 1892. iii,
95+iiipp., 4 pls.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Special report of the chief of the weather bureau to the
Secretary of Agriculture, 1891. Washington, 1891. 26pp.

---- ---- Instructions for voluntary observers. Prepared under
direction of the chief of the weather bureau by T. Russell. Washington,
1892. 100pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Monthly Weather Review._ Vol. xx. January-April, 1892.
Washington, 1892. 4^o.

---- ---- Weather map. [Issued twice daily.] January-June, 1891. Size
19 x 24 inches.

---- ---- Weather crop bulletin. [Issued weekly from March to October,
and monthly throughout the year.] Uniform with weather map in size and
form.


ALAMEDA, Calif. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring the erection of a public building in Alameda. January
12, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 14; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ALASKA. Report of the governor of Alaska for the fiscal year 1891.
Washington, 1891. 53pp.
                                                            .25

---- Estimate of an appropriation to complete the survey of the
boundary line between Alaska and British Columbia. February 1, 1892.
3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 111; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the agent in charge of seal islands asking for
an appropriation to supply the inhabitants with food, fuel, etc. March
5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 154; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TRAFFIC. Report from the committee on education and
labor to accompany bill (S. 749) to provide for a commission on the
subject of alcoholic liquor traffic. January 25, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 103; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ALLEN, DARLING, and or's. Findings of the Court of Claims in the causes
of D. Allen, Preston Chavis, W. P. Dowdy, J. G. Flowers, T. J. Hargiss,
J. I. McCown, J. G. Newlee, M. Patrick, N. Potter, Mary Quarles, J. A.
Roe, W. Sloan, and J. G. Thurman, respectively, v. U.S. January 20,
1892. 15pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 46; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- GEORGE A. Manners and customs of the Mohaves. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 2pp.
                                                            .02

    Smithsonian pub. no. 828.


---- H. N. Cattle disease in Korea. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports, no. 138, pp. 588-589.


ALLENTOWN, PENN. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill to erect a public building at Allentown. January
14, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 28; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


AMERICAN EPHEMERIS and NAUTICAL ALMANAC for the year 1895. Washington,
1892. viii, 1-532pp., 3 pls.
                                                           1.00


AMERICAN HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION. Annual report for 1890. Washington,
1891. x, 1-310pp.
                                                            .75

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 83; 51st Cong., 2d sess.


AMES, HERMAN V. Amendments to the Constitution of the United States.
(Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Ass'n rep. 1890, pp. 69-70.


---- JOHN G. List of congressional documents from the 15th to the 51st
congress, and of government publications containing debates and
proceedings of congress, together with miscellaneous lists of public
documents, with historical and bibliographical notes. Washington, 1892.
120pp.
                                                            .75

---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution to print
2,000 copies of list of congressional documents. May 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1340; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ANDERSON, DAVID B. Findings of the court of claims in the case of
Anderson v. U.S. January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 45; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- MARY T. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Anderson
_v._ U.S. January 29, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 61; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- T. H., _U.S. Minister._ Gold mines of Bolivia. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 268-274.

---- The silver mines of Bolivia. 10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 519-528.


ANDREWS, CHARLES M. Theory of village community. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 49-50.


APPROPRIATIONS. Report from the committee on appropriations to
accompany bill (H.R. 6876) making appropriations for certain urgent
deficiencies. March 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 526; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 7818) to provide for most urgent deficiencies in appropriations
for 1891-'92. April 1 and May 9, 1892. 5+1pp.

    H.R. reps. nos. 963 and 1331; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 9040) making appropriations for the legislative, executive, and
judicial expenses of the government for 1892-'93. June 27, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 839; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ARIZONA. Report of the acting governor of Arizona to the Secretary of
the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 41pp.
                                                            .20

---- Memorial of the constitutional convention requesting the survey of
lands in the limit of the grant in Arizona to the Atlantic & Pacific
Railroad Company. December 22, 1891. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 10; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on territories favoring bill (H.R.
3980) to ratify an act of the legislature of Arizona, making an
appropriation of $30,000 for Arizona's exhibit at the World's Fair.
February 23 and March 16, 1892. 1+1pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 423, and Sen. rep. no. 388; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on territories favoring bill for the
admission of Arizona as a State into the Union. March 16, 1892. 30pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 737; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ARMORIES. Letter from the Secretary of War transmitting statement of
expenditures at the Springfield armory during 1890-'91. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ARMSTRONG, EDWARD S. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of E. S. Armstrong (breach of contract). February 3,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 151; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ARMY. List of all civilian employés of the army, with the amount paid
to each. January 5, 1892. 48pp.
                                                            .25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 19; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the expenditures of the appropriations for the
contingent expenses of the military establishment for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 1891. 7pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (S.
1196) to facilitate the settlement of claims for arrears of pay and
bounty. January 21, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 62; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (S.
552) relative to the hospital corps of the army. January 28, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 132; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill to
provide for the settlement of officers' or soldiers' accounts or claims
in certain cases. February 2, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 144; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (S.
620) to amend "an act to promote the administration of justice in the
army," approved Oct. 1, 1890. February 2, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 147; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs on bills (H.R. 3605
and 328) concerning lineal promotion of officers in the army. February
5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 171; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs to accompany bill
(H.R. 329) concerning pay of privates of the hospital corps. February
5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 172; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War transmitting additional
communications relative to the promotions of lieutenants in line.
February 10, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 28, pt. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War with draft of a bill with
reference to the retirement of enlisted men of the army. February 10,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 33; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs to accompany a bill
to reorganize the artillery and infantry of the army, etc. February 15,
1892. 15pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 231; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War relative to the rank and
promotion of first lieutenants. March 3, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 48; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs to accompany bill
(H.R. 6923) making appropriations for the military establishment for
1892-'93. March 5, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 549; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Petition of prominent officers of the army for the repeal of a
certain law relating to the uniforms and title of brevetted officers.
March 18, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 60; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the adjutant-general recommending appropriation to pay
for such of the post traders' buildings remaining at permanent military
posts as may be suitable for army service. April 29, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 207; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the adjutant-general inclosing a draft of bill to
modify act of 1890, relating to desertions. April 23, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 209; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War recommending an amendment to act
of 1890 as to brevet rank on certain officers of the army. June 1,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 249; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ARMY REGISTER. _See_ War Dep't, Adjutant General's office.


ASH, JOHN, and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the causes of
J. Ash, John Beck, Susan Brown, J. L. Nicodemus, J. Nicodemus, J. C.
Lee, J. F. Miller, B. Welck, respectively, _v._ U.S. February 8, 1892.
9pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 72; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ASSAY COMMISSION. Proceedings, 1892; also laws of the United States
relating to the annual assay and rules for the organization and
government of the Board. [Washington, 1892.] 32pp.


ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES AND EXPERIMENT STATIONS.
Proceedings of the fifth annual convention held at Washington, D.C.,
August 12-18, 1891. Washington, 1892. 113pp.
                                                            .40

    Agr'l Dep't, Experiment Station: Bulletin no. 7.


ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTS. Proceedings of the 8th
annual convention 1891. _See_ Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry,
Bulletin no. 31.

---- Official methods of analysis adopted by the Association of
Official Agricultural Chemists at its meeting August 13-15, 1891. 68pp.
.25

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 179-246.


ATTORNEY-GENERAL. Annual report for 1891. Washington, 1891. xxxi,
260pp.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 7; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ATWATER, WILBUR OLIN. The chemical composition and nutritive values of
food-fishes and aquatic invertebrates. [Extracted from the report of
the U.S. Fish commission for 1888.] Washington, 1891. 192pp., 9 pls.
                                                            .60


AUSTRALIA. Statistics of 1890. 8pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 186, pp. 165-172.


BABCOCK, A. D. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of A. D. Babcock and wife. (For use and occupancy of land.)
February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 199; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BADLEY, HENRY. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Badley
and others _v._ U.S. January 13, 1892. 20pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 40; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BAGGS, GEORGE T. Tariff legislation in New South Wales. 11pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 27-37.


BAGSHAW, GEORGE. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of G. Bagshaw. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 205; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BAILEY, HENRY T. Historic ornament and design in the public schools.
5pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1275-1279.


---- JOHN C. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Bailey _v._
    U.S. January 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 30; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BAKER, E. L., _Consul._ Trade and finances of the Argentine republic.
70pp., map.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 385-454.


---- FRANK. The ascent of man. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 22pp.
                                                            .02

    Smithsonian pub. no. 821.


---- S. K. T. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Baker _v._
    U.S. January 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 33; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BALMER, CHARLES. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Balmer
_v._ U.S. 7pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 79; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BANCROFT, CECIL F. P. The Andover theological seminary, Mass. Sketch.
14pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 236-249.


BANDINEL, FRED., _Consul._ Commerce of New-Chwang. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 134-135.


BANE, MOSES M. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of M. M. Bane. (Office rent.) February 4, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 156; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BANKRUPTCY. Addresses, memorials, indorsements, petitions, and
resolutions advocating the enactment of the Torrey bankrupt bill.
January 19, 1892. 245pp.
                                                           1.00

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 48; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of a special committee, etc., of the National Board of
Trade concerning the Torrey bankruptcy bill. June 8, 1892. 11pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 174; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Petition of the Denver chamber of commerce in favor of the Torrey
bankruptcy bill. June 20, 1892. 6pp.

    Sen mis. doc. no. 179; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BARNARD'S AMERICAN JOURNAL OF EDUCATION. Analytical index to 31 vols.,
1855-1881. Washington, 1892. 128pp.
                                                            .50

    U.S. Bureau of Education: Catalogue of Educational literature, part 1.


BARNES, ALMONT. Report of agriculture of South America, with maps and
latest statistics of trade. Washington, 1892. 189pp., 3 maps.
                                                            .50

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of statistics: Report no. 2, Miscellaneous
series.


BARUS, CARL. The viscosity of solids. Washington, 1891. xii, 139pp., 6
pls.
                                                            .15

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 73.


BATCHELLER, GEORGE S., _Consul-general._ Commerce of Portugal. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 25-27.


BATTLE, H. B. Report on potash. 5pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 144-148.

---- On the loss of moisture in bottled fertilizer samples when closed
with cork. 1p.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, p. 159.

---- The effect of finer grinding in the preparation of fertilizer
samples. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 160-162.


BEDELL, OSSIAN, _Consul._ Farm statistics of Ontario. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 156-158.


BEDFORD CITY, VA. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill for a public building at Bedford city, Va.
February 8, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 181; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BEDLOE, EDWARD, _Consul._ Labor in Amoy. 20pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 137-156.


BELCHER, D. P. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Belcher
v. U.S. February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 92; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BENEDICT, JAMES E. Preliminary descriptions of 37 new species of hermit
crabs of the genus _Eupagurus_ in the U.S. Nat. Mus. From Proceedings
of the U.S. Nat. Mus. V. XV, pp. 1-26 (No. 887). Washington, 1892.
26pp.


BENTON, FRANK. Bees of great value to fruit and seed growers. 3pp.

    Insect life v, 4 nos. 7-8, pp. 254-256.


BERING SEA. Messages from the President of the United States
transmitting the convention of February 29, 1892, between the U.S. and
Great Britain, submitting to arbitration the questions which have
arisen between those governments concerning the jurisdictional rights
of the U.S. in the waters of Bering Sea, etc.; and also transmitting
recent correspondence upon that subject with the British government.
Washington, 1892. 102pp., 1 map.
                                                            .50

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 55; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of an appropriation for the expenses of the steamer
_Albatross_ in the Bering Sea. March 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 168; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BETTS, NICHOLS & CO. Report from the committee on finances favoring
bill for the relief of B., N. & Co. January 6, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the relief
of Betts, Nichols & Co. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 97; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BEVINS, SAMUEL. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of S. Bevins. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 208; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BIBB, E. C. Findings of the court of claims in the case of E. C. Bibb
_v._ U.S. February 18, 1892, 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 100; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BIDDLE, JEROME H. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to remove charge of desertion against J. H. Biddle.
February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 105; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BIRCH-HIRSCHFELDER, DR.--. The value of instruction in manual dexterity
as regards bodily development and hygiene. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 896-901.


BIRNIE, ROGERS, _U.S. A._ The resistance and shrinkages of built-up
cannon, with application to United States army ordnance. Supplementary
to Notes on the construction of ordnance no. 35. 1891. 4^o. 48pp., 8
pls.

    Notes on the construction of ordnance, No. 59.


BLACKBURN, I. W., _m. d._ A study of nineteen cases of general
paralysis of the insane. 18pp., 6 pls.

    Gov't Hospital for the Insane Report, 1891, pp. 61-80.


BLAIR, HENRY W. Message from the President transmitting the
correspondence in relation to the non-acceptance of Mr. Blair as
minister to China; together with the memorial of Mr. Blair. Washington,
1892. 25pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 98; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BLAKE, CHARLES M. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to pay C. M. Blake full pay as chaplain in the army from
1869 to 1878. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 267; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- JOHN W. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of J. W. Blake. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 90; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BLANKENSHIP, JOHN R. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill for the relief of J. R. Blankenship. (Confirming an entry.)
January 18, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 36; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BLUE BOOK. _See_ Official Register.


BOAT RAILWAY. Report from the committee on transportation routes to the
seaboard favoring bill for the construction of a boat railway at the
Dalles and Celilo Falls and Ten-mile rapids of the Columbia river, etc.
February 8, 1892. 22pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 180; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BOND, WILLIAM, & CO. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of W. Bond & Co. (Overpayment for stamps.) January 27,
1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 119; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BONHAM, JOHN M. An indictment against the American system of free
common schools. [Followed by] Mr. Bonham's indictment and criticisms
considered. By I. Edwards Clarke. 28pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, part ii, pp. 603-630.


BOOTH, JAMES C. Report from the Committee on finance favoring bill for
the relief of heirs of J. C. Booth. (For silver stolen from the mint.)
January 6, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the relief
of J. C. Booth. February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 379; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BOURINOT, J. G. Canada and the United States from historical points of
view. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 39-40.

---- Responsible government in Canada. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 73-74.


BOURN, AUGUSTUS O., _Consul-general._ Italian statistics. 66pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 45-110.


BOVELL, JOHN V. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of J. V. Bovell. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 193; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BOWEN, HERBERT W., _Consul._ Spanish wine. 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136., p. 128.

---- The bank of Spain. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137., pp. 278-279.


BOYD, AUGUSTUS. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to place the name of A. Boyd on the retired list. January 28,
1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 134; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BOYS, C. V. Quartz fibers. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 22pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 813.


BRADFORD, JOHN S., Consul. Imports and exports of Antigua during 1890.
17pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 67-83.


BRADFORD, PENN. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill for a public building at Bradford, Penn. January
11, 1892. 1p.

    Sen rep. no. 7; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BRIGGS, WARREN R. The hygienic construction of the Bridgeport High
School. 17pp., inc. cuts.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 3,
    1891.


BROWN, S. W., and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the causes
of S. W. Brown, T. Farrell, A. J. McAllister, W. McClintic, J. W. Ott,
W. Vaughn, and R. T. Wilson, respectively, _v._ the U.S. March 15,
1892. 8pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 132; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BRUCE, WALLACE, _Consul._ Commerce of Edinburg and Leith. 9pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 181-189.

---- Exports of Iceland. 1891. 11p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, p. 373.


BRUNER, LAWRENCE. Report on destructive locusts [in Colorado, Wyoming,
Dakotas, Montana, Idaho, Utah, and Manitoba, during 1891]. 25pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 27, pp. 9-33.

---- Report upon insect depredations in Nebraska for 1891. 4pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 9-13.


BURDETTE, JOHN C. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of J. C. Burdette. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 206; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BURGESS, W., _Consul._ English pottery and pottery trade. 10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 94-103.


BURLINGTON, IOWA. Report from the committee on interstate commerce and
foreign commerce favoring bill to amend "an act to authorize the
construction of a bridge at Burlington," approved August 6, 1888.
February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 234; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BURNS, WILLIAM W. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of W. W. Burns. (Royalty on Sibley tents.) January 26, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 109; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


BURR, GEORGE L. The fate of Detrich Flade. 1p.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, p. 47.


BUSH, GEORGE GARY. History of higher education in Massachusetts.
Washington, 1891. 445pp., 33 pls.
                                                           1.25

    Interior Dept., Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891.


BUSHNELL HORACE, _d. d._ Common schools. 7pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 581-587.


BUTLER, NICHOLAS MURRAY. The argument against manual training. 3pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1211-1213.


CALDER, FANNIE L. Practical cooking in elementary schools. [And
discussion.] 11pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1105-1115.


CALIFORNIA. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill
to reimburse California, Oregon, and Nevada for moneys expended in the
suppression of the rebellion. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 158; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on mines and mining in the matter of
mining débris in the rivers of California. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no 165; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Interior relative to certain
lands in the Yosemite valley granted to California. March 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CAMERON, ALEXANDER, _Consul._ Fertilizers in New South Wales. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 225-226.


CAMPBELL, DOUGLAS. How the written ballot came into the United States.
(Abstract.) 3pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 63-65.


---- JOHN P. Biological teaching in the colleges of the United States.
Washington, 1891. 183pp.
                                                            .75

    Interior Dept., Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 9,
    1891.


CANADA. Partial report from the committee on finance on the effect of
the tariff upon trade between the U.S. and Canada. May 3 and June 7,
1892. 83+95pp.
                                                            .50

    Sen. reps. nos. 619 and 788; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Message from the President of the United States relative to
negotiations for reciprocal trade with Canada. June 20 and July 1,
1892. 47+11pp.
                                                            .25

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 114, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. Census. 1891. 8pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 504-511.


CAPEN, E. H., _d. d._ Tufts College. Sketch. 9pp.

    Interior Dept., Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 271-279.


CAPITOL. Report of the architect of the United States capitol to the
Secretary of the Interior. 1891. Washington, 1891. 6pp.

---- Senator Butler's resolution for an expert examination of the
sanitary condition of the capitol. March 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 98; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


CARMACK, JOSEPH W. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of J. W. Carmack. (For pay and
allowances.) January 14, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 27; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CARMAN, IRVINE. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of I. Carman. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 162; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CARPENTER, THOMAS H. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to restore the name of T. H. Carpenter to the army rolls.
February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 266; 52 Cong., 1st sess.


CARR, WILLIAM A. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Carr
_v._ U.S. January 11, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 36; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CARROLL, HENRY K. Statistics of churches. 4^o. 42+47pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletins nos. 159 and 174.


CARTER, CHARLES M. A practical programme for a course of industrial
drawing in public schools. 5pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1243-1247.


---- R. BRUDENELL. Color-vision and color-blindness. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 20pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 830.


CASEY, PETER. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs on
bill for the relief of P. Casey. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 194; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- ROBERT. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of R. Casey. (Charge of desertion.) February 5,
1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 104; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CEMETERIES. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill
to improve the road to the national cemetery near Pensacola, Fl.
January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 46; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CENSUS. A permanent census bureau. Letter from the Secretary of the
Interior transmitting a report of the superintendent of the census
together with a draft of a bill, in response to Senate resolution of
February 16, 1891. Washington, 1891. 185pp.
                                                            .75

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _See_, also, Interior Dept., Census office.


CENTENNIAL BOARD OF FINANCE. Reports from the committee on the
judiciary to accompany bill (S. 2107) providing for the disposition of
the remaining funds, etc. February 9 and April 21, 1892. 2+2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 197, and H.R. rep. no. 1150; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE STATE OF N. Y. Memorial in behalf of the
maintenance of the standard of value. March 23, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen mis. doc. no. 103; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHAMBERS, JAMES C., _Consul._ General and petroleum trade of Batoum.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 16-23.


---- THOMAS. Report from the committee onpost-offices, &c., favoring
bill for the relief of T. Chambers. (For losses as contractor.) January
11, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 9; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHAMPLAIN AND ST. LAWRENCE RAILROAD CO. Report from the committee on
military affairs on bill granting to the C. & St. L. R.R. Co. right of
way across the Fort Montgomery reservation. February 27, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 477; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHATARD, THOMAS MAREAN. An apparatus for the determination of water in
mineral analysis. 3pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 84-86.

---- The separation of titanium, chromium, aluminum, iron, barium, and
phosphoric acid in rock analysis. 4pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 87-90.

---- Analysis of rocks from California collected by J. S. Diller. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 123.

---- Analysis of brown hornblende, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 119.

---- Analysis of sandstone from Flagstaff, Arizona, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 124.

---- Keratophyr from Marblehead Neck, Mass.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 121.


CHEATHAM, ADELICIA. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of representatives of A. Cheatham. Refund of income
taxes. January 28 and February 10, 1892. 32+32pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 133, and H.R. rep. no. 263; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHELAN, WASHINGTON. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill for the relief of inhabitants of the town of Chelan, Wash.
February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 237; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHERRIE, GEO. K. Description of two apparently new fly-catchers from
Costa Rica. From Proceedings U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xv, pp. 27-28. [No.
888.]  2pp.


CHILE. Message of the President of the United States respecting the
relations with Chile, together with diplomatic correspondence; the
correspondence with naval officials; the inquiry into the attack on the
seamen of the U.S. S. _Baltimore_, etc. Washington, 1892. 664pp., map.
1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 91; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Message from the President of the United States transmitting
further correspondence respecting the relations with Chile. January 28,
1892. 10pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 91, pt. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution to print
6,000 copies of ex. doc. 91. February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 307: 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHINESE EXCLUSION. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury with draft
of a bill to prohibit the coming of Chinese persons into the U.S.
February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 67; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on immigration and naturalization to
accompany bill (H.R. 5809) relating to the exclusion of the Chinese.
February 10 and 18, 1892. 5+1pp. [And minority views.]

    H.R. rep. no. 255, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on foreign affairs to accompany bill
(H.R. 6185) relating to Chinese exclusion. [And views of the minority.]
February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 407; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the Universal peace union against the Chinese
exclusion bill. April 23, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis doc. no. 138; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CHURCH, A. W., and SMITH, H. H. Tables showing the contents of the
several volumes comprising the Annals of Congress, Congressional
Debates, Congressional Globe, Congressional Record, Statutes-at-Large,
    U.S. Supreme Court Reports, and succession of Supreme Court Justices;
arranged by years and Congresses. [Washington, 1892.] 29pp.
                                                            .50


CLAIMS. Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring bill (H.R.
484) to amend sec. 3477 R. S., relating to transfers and assignments of
claims against the U.S. February 23, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 422; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CLALLAM, WASHINGTON. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill granting to Clallam county certain public lands in trust. February
1, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 141; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CLARK, J. A., and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the causes
of J. A. Clark, A. L. and W. G. Keithley, F. G. Shipp, respectively,
_v._ U.S. February 18, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 101; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- JOHN S. Drawing in public education, practical suggestions for
courses in primary, grammar, and high schools. 5pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and Industry, pt. 2, pp. 1253-1260.


---- WILLIAM BULLOCK. Correlation papers. Eocene. Washington, 1891.
173pp., 2 pls.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 83.


CLARKE, FRANK WIGGLESWORTH. Report of work done in the division of
chemistry and physics mainly during the fiscal year 1889-'90.
Washington, 1891. 131pp.
                                                            .15

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78.

---- The relative abundance of the chemical elements. 9pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey; Bulletin no. 78, pp. 34-42.


---- W., and SCHNEIDER, E. A. Experiments upon the constitution of the
natural silicates. 23pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 11-33.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., FEBRUARY, 1892.    No. 2.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.

CATALOGUE.

FEBRUARY, 1892.


CLARKE, ISAAC EDWARDS. Art and industry. Instruction in drawing applied
to the industrial and fine arts as given in the colleges of agriculture
and the mechanic arts and in the public schools, etc., in the United
States. Part ii. Industrial and manual training. Washington, 1891.
CXLVIII, 1-1338pp.
                                                           1.50

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education. Also, Sen. ex. doc. no. 209,
    pt. 2; 46th Cong., 2d sess.

---- The Swedish slojd instruction. 31pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, part 2, pp. 863-893.

---- The industrial education movement as contemplated by Prof. Walter
Smith. A brief plea for the retention of the "art ideal." 2pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 953-954.

---- _See_ Bonham, J. M.


CLIFT, WILLIAM. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of W. Clift, of Tenn., an old soldier, for wood taken by the
army. February 1, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 142; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CLUTE, O. The State agricultural college of Michigan. Sketch. 9pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 105-115.


COAST DEFENSES. Memorial of the Port Townsend chamber of commerce on
the subject of coast defenses. January 18, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COFFIN, FRED. F. B. A special report of work in the artesian and
underflow investigation, and views of certain conditions existing in
South Dakota. 12pp., 2 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't: Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 4, pp. 51-61.


COHN, ADOLPHE. The formation of the French constitution. (Abstract.)
2pp.

    Am. Hist. Ass'n rep. 1890, pp. 55-56.


COINAGE. Report from the committee on coinage, weights and measures to
accompany bill H.R. 4426, entitled "A bill for the free coinage of gold
and silver, for the issue of coin notes, and for other purposes."
February 10, 1892. 28pp.
                                                            .20

    H.R. rep. no. 249; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Testimony before the committee on coinage, weights and measures,
    H.R., in January and February, 1892. 62+10pp.

---- _See_, also, Treasury Department.


COLLARD, THADDEUS, and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the
causes of T. Collard, S. Gilbreath, F. Mercer, J. L. Walls, H. M.
Withers, H. T. Woody, and G. W. Yuckley, respectively, _v._ U.S.
January 15, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 42; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COLLINS, J. W. Report on the fisheries of the Pacific coast of the
United States. [Extracted from the report of the Commissioner for fish
and fisheries for 1888.] Washington, 1891. 269pp., 49 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- The fishing vessels and boats of the Pacific coast. [Extracted
from the bulletin of the U.S. Fish Commission for 1890, pp. 13-48.]
Washington, 1892. 38pp., 13 pls.
                                                            .50


COLORADO. Memorial of the legislature for grant of public lands in the
state for the purpose of aiding reclamation of irrigable lands.
December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 10; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of general assembly for a donation of part of Fort Lyon
reservation for a home for disabled soldiers. December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 11; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the legislature opposing the Conger lard bill, etc.
December 8, 1891. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 12; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COLUMBIA INSTITUTION FOR THE DEAF AND DUMB. Thirty-fourth annual report
to the Secretary of the Interior. 1891. Washington, 1891. 13pp.


COLUMBIAN HISTORICAL EXPOSITION, MADRID. Communication from the
Secretary of State regarding the representation of the United States.
February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 66; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (H.R.
5150) providing representation of the U.S. at the Columbian Historical
Exposition at Madrid. March 30, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 923; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COMMERCIAL TRAVELLERS. Report from the committee on interstate commerce
to accompany bill (H.R. 372) to permit railway companies to grant
concessions to commercial travellers. February 8, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 186; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COMMONS, JOHN R. _See_ Knight, G. W.


COMPTON, H. W. Testimony as to the practical value of drawing and clay
modelling in primary schools. 2pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and Industry, pt. 2, pp. 1309-1310.


COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY. Annual report to the 1st session, 52d
Congress. December 7, 1891. Washington, 1891. 2 vols.
                                                           1.50

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CONGRESSIONAL DIRECTORY. Fifty-second Congress, first session. By W. H.
Michael. 1st edition corrected to December 5, 1891. Washington, 1891.
406pp., 1 pls.
                                                            .25

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ 2d edition. Corrected to January 29, 1892. Washington,
1892. 277pp., 2 pls.
                                                            .25

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 1, pt. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ 3d edition. Corrected to May 7, 1892. 8^o. Washington,
1892. 317pp., 2 pls.
                                                            .25

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 1, pt. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on printing in reference to the appendix
of maps of congressional districts in the Congressional Directory.
February 7, 1892. 1p.
                                                      Each 1.00

    H.R. rep. no. 246; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CONGRESSIONAL RECORD. 52d Congress, 1st session, 1891-'92. Vol. 23,
parts 1-3. Washington, 1892. 4^o.


CONN, H. W. The fermentations of milk. Washington, 1892. 75pp.
                                                            .35

    Agr'l Dep't, office of experiment stations: Bulletin no. 9.


CONSTITUTION. Report from the committee on the judiciary adversely on
H. res. 43 to amend the constitution. February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 294; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CONTESTED ELECTIONS. Digest of contested-election cases in the 51st
Congress. Compiled by C. H. Rowell. Washington, 1891. 834pp. Sheep.
3.50

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 137; 51st Cong., 2d sess.


CONTRACT-LABOR. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to
expenditures for the enforcement of the contract-labor law. March 11,
1892. 9pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 162; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of State calling attention to a certain
error in the immigration act of March 3, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 50; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COOK, A. J. Report of apicultural experiments in 1891. 10pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Div. of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 83-92.


COOKE, W. W. Report on dairy products. 6pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 16-21.

---- Analysis of sour milk. 5pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 22-26.


COPE, E. D. A critical review of the characters and variations of the
snakes of N. America. From Proceedings of the U.S. Nat. Mus., v. xiv.
pp. 589-694. [No. 882.] Washington, 1892. 106pp.


COQUILLETT, D. W. Report of the locust invasion of California in 1891.
24pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 27, pp. 34-57.

---- Notes on the habits of some California coleoptera. 3pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 260-262.

---- Report on the scale insects of California. 23pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Div. of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 13-35.


COSSIGNY, M. J. C. DE. Agricultural hydraulics. Chapters on water, its
management, climate, intermittent irrigation, and that of plants
usually cultivated. Translated by Mrs. A. F. Wood. 20pp., 2 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't: Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 1; pp. 349-368.


COTTON. Senate resolutions relative to the appointment of a committee
to inquire into the low price of cotton, etc. January 26, 1892. 7pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 72, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COULTER, JOHN M. Manual of the _phanerogams_ and _pteridophytes_ of
western Texas. _Gamopetalæ._ Washington, 1892. v, 153-345, xpp.
                                                           1.00

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of botany: Contributions from U.S. Nat.
Herbarium, v. 2, no. 2.


COURCHAINE, DANIEL B. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill to remove charge of desertion against D. B. Courchaine.
February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 363; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COURT OF CLAIMS. Adverse report from the committee on the judiciary on
bill to restrict the jurisdiction of the court, etc. February 16, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 366; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COURTS OF THE U.S. Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring
bill to change the time of holding the courts of the U.S. at Oshkosh
from July to June. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 170; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to change the time of holding court in the
eastern district of Texas. February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 231; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Adversely on bill providing for two additional associate
justices of the supreme court of Utah. February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 232; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill relating to sales of property under orders
and decrees of U.S. courts. February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 270; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 456) to limit the jurisdiction of the
district and circuit courts of the U.S. [With views of the minority.]
February 11, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 271; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to authorize the appointment of an
additional clerk for the district and circuit courts of the eastern
districts of Arkansas. February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 295; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to provide the times and places for holding
    U.S. courts in Idaho. February 13, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 309; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of a deficiency appropriation for the circuit courts of
appeals. February 15, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 37; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring bill fixing
the time for holding U.S. courts in the northern district of Iowa.
January 18, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 39; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to provide terms of the U.S. circuit and
district courts of Cumberland, Md. February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 405; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill disqualifying justices, judges, etc., in
certain cases. [And views of the minority.] February 18, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 406; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 6262) relating to fees of jurors and
witnesses in U.S. courts. February 23, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 424; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COWDEN, JOHN. Memorial showing not only the utter worthlessness but the
absurdity of the work of the Mississippi river commission. April 16,
1892. 13pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 188; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


COX, WILLIAM VAN ZANDT. Report upon the exhibit of the Smithsonian
Institution, including the U.S. Nat. Museum at the Centennial
Exposition, Marietta, Ohio. July 16 to 21, 1888. 7pp.

    U.S. Nat. Mus. Rep., 1888-'89, pp. 180-186.


CRAIG _v._ STEWART. Reports [majority and minority] from the committee
on elections in the case of the 24th congressional district of
Pennsylvania. February 16, 1892. 3+10pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 367, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CRAMER, DELOS. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to amend the military record of D. Cramer. February 26, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 452; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CRANGLE, HENRY. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill to remove charge of desertion against H. Crangle. January 21,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 72; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CRAWFORD, J. M., _Consul-general._ The sunflower industry of Russia.
14pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 233-246.

---- Russian farm products in 1891. 15pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports, no. 137, pp. 321-335.

---- Linseed crop of Russia in 1891. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 165-167.


CRENSHAW, A. B., and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the
causes of A. B. Crenshaw, J. H. Humphrys, and John Kannell,
respectively, _v._ U.S. January 28, 1892. 4pp.


CROFFUT, WILLIAM AUGUSTUS. Suggestions for the preparation and
illustrations for publication by the U.S. geological survey. January,
1892. [Washington.] 15pp.


CROFT, C. I., _Consul._ American interests in Colombia. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 49-51.


CROZIER, WILLIAM, _U.S. A._ Design for an experimental carriage for a
7-inch b. l. siege howitzer. 1891. 4^o. 24pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .50

    Notes on the construction of ordnance no. 57.


CULLUM, GEORGE W. Letter from the Attorney-General relative to a
bequest of General Cullum for a memorial hall at West Point. April 27,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 89; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CULVER, GARVEY E. Report on artesian investigation in South Dakota.
19pp., 3 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation Inquiry 1892, pt. 3, pp. 191-209.


CURTIS, GEORGE F. Memorial for the preparation and printing of a
catalogue of the law library of Congress. March 23, 1892. 12pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 104; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


CUSTOMS REGULATIONS. Customs regulations of the United States provided
for the instruction and guidance of officers of customs. Washington,
1892. xi, 1-613pp., 4 pls.
                                                           3.00


CUTTER, CHARLES A. Rules for a dictionary catalogue. 3d edition, with
corrections and additions and an alphabetical index. Washington, 1891.
140pp.
                                                           1.00


DABNEY, RICHARD HEATH. Is history a science? (Abstract.) 1p.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, p. 109.


DABNEY, SIMMONS & CO. Report from the committee on claims on bill for
the relief of D., S. & Co., (for refund). February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 414; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DALL, WILLIAM HEALEY. Geographical explorations. Early expeditions to
the region of Bering sea and strait. From the reports and journal of
Bering. Appendix no. 19, U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 18pp., 2 maps.
                                                            .75

    _Note:_ 2d [half] title. Notes on an original manuscript chart of
Bering's expedition of 1725-1730, and on an original manuscript chart
of his second expedition, together with a summary of a journal of the
first expedition, kept by Peter Chaplin, and now first rendered into
English from Bergh's Russian version.


DANIELS, BYRON G., _Consul._ Fishing industry of the United Kingdom.
39pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 457-495.


---- JOSEPH S. Olivet College, Olivet, Mich. Sketch. 7pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dept., Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 138-144.


DARLING, C. W. State historical societies. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep., 1890, pp. 101-102.


DARTON, NELSON HORATIO. Records of North American geology for 1887 to
1889, inclusive. Washington, 1891. 173pp.
                                                            .15

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 75.

---- Records of North American geology for 1890. Washington, 1891.
88pp.
                                                            .15

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 91.


DAVENPORT-HILL, ROSAMOND. Technical education in board-schools. 8pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1041-1048.


DAVIDSON, GEORGE. Geodesy. International geodetic association, 9th
conference. Address by George Davidson. Appendix no. 17, U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 15pp.
                                                            .15


DAVIS, ALEXANDER. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Davis
_v._ U.S. January 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 35; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- J. M. Rio Grande college. Ohio. Sketch. 3pp.

    Int. Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 235-237.


---- L. A. Report from the committee on post-offices and post-roads
favoring bill for the relief of L. A. Davis. (Mail contractor.)
February 9, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 196; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DECORATIONS. Letter from the Secretary of State with draft of a bill to
empower Admiral George Brown, Capt. G. C. Remey, Lieut. G. S. Dyer and
o'rs to accept decorations from the government of Hawaii. April 14,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 131; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DEKAY, CHARLES. On a bronze buddha in the U.S. Nat. Museum. From report
of the Nat. Mus. 1888-'89, pp. 729-735. Washington, 1891. 18pp., 1 pl.


DENBY, CHARLES, _U.S. Minister._ American citizens resident in China.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 23-24.


DEPEW, CHAUNCEY M. The common schools of America the hope of the
republic. 2pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 579-580.


DERBY, S. C. Antioch College, Ohio. Sketch. 10pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 128-137.


DETROIT, Mich. Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring
resolution to release the claim of the U.S. to a certain lot in
Detroit. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 163; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DETTE, JOHN F. W. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of J. F. W. Dette. (Loss on contract.) January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 76; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DEWEY, FREDERIC PERKINS. A preliminary descriptive catalogue of the
systematic collections in economic geology and metallurgy in the U.S.
Nat. Museum. Washington, 1891. xviii, 256pp., 34 pls.
                                                           1.50

    U.S. National Museum; Bulletin no. 42.


DEWEY, L. H. Characteristic vegetation of the desert region from
western Texas to central Arizona. 5pp., 8 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 351-355.


DICKSON, ALMAR F. Trade and industries of Gaspé Basin. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 190-192.


DICKSON, DAVID. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of D. Dickson and or's. (Rents for army purposes.) January
27, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 116; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DILLER, JOSEPH SILAS. A late volcanic eruption in northern California
and its peculiar lava. Washington, 1891. 33pp., 17 pls.
                                                            .15

    U.S. Geol. Survey; Bulletin no. 79.


DIMMICK, E. A., _Consul._ Commerce and industries of Barbados. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 6-11.


DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICE. Report from the committee on
appropriations to accompany bill (H.R. 7624) making appropriations for
the diplomatic and consular service for 1892-'93. June 1, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 769; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA. Report of the electrical commission [Andrew
Rosewater, H. A. Rowland, and F. B. Shunk] appointed to consider the
location, arrangement, and operation of electric wires in the District
of Columbia. Washington, 1892. 151pp., 52 pls., 4 maps.
                                                           3.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 15; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the superintendent of charities for the year ending June
30, 1891. 62pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 46; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.

---- Expenditures for the collection of garbage, etc. December 17,
1891. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 26; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on the District of Columbia favoring
bill (S. 267) for the preservation of the public peace, etc. January
18, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 32; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ To accompany bill (S. 831) to prevent bookmaking and
poolselling. January 18, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 33; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1351) to provide a girl's reform school.
January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 92; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 2785) to amend the general
incorporation law of the District approved May 17, 1882. February 1,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 137; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1492) for an inspector of plumbing, etc.
February 1, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 139: 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1884) to prevent frauds on the water
revenues of the District. February 1, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 140; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 4429) to empower the commissioners to
grant respites and pardons in certain cases. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 174; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 4107) to change the name of the
National Safe Deposit Company. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 175; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1307) to provide a permanent system of
highways in the District outside of cities. February 10, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 207; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 2045) to rebuild the bridge across Rock
Creek at M st. February 11, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 217; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 5119) to prevent the building of
houses along certain alleys in Washington. February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 324; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1886) to authorize the commissioners to
grant pardons and respites in certain cases. February 15, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 325; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to incorporate D.C. Suburban Railway
Company. February 15, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 326; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ To accompany bill (S. 741) to incorporate the Eclectic
Medical Society of the District. February 16, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 239; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 4563) for the relief of holders of
drawback certificates. February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 409; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the Commissioners in regard to the extension of
North Capitol street to the Soldiers' Home. February 29, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 85; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 6746) making appropriations for the support of the government of
the District for 1892-'93. March 1, 1892. 34pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 495; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on military affairs favoring joint
resolution (H. res. 66) to loan flags, etc., for street decoration
during the Grand Army encampment in September, 1892. March 1 and 9,
1892. 1+1pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 499, and Sen. rep. no. 336; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commissioners in regard to the condition of
the various public bridges in said District. March 23, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 102; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 6746) making appropriations for the expenses of the government of
the District for 1892-'93. April 4, 1892. 7pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 492; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on the District of Columbia favoring
bill (S. 2460) to repeal the license tax of $25 on produce dealers in
the markets. April 20, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 580; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations on the Senate
amendments to the District appropriation bill for 1892-'93. April 23,
1892. 16pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1167; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commissioners in regard to change of motive
power, etc., of railroads operated in the District. May 9, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 150; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Supplemental estimates of deficiencies in appropriations for the
District of Columbia. May 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 233; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commissioners in regard to the Washington
market company. May 17, 1892. 11pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 154; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commissioners in regard to the occupancy of
the river front. May 17, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 155; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Assessment of taxes in the District of Columbia. May 24, 1892. Mr.
Johnson from the select committee to investigate tax assessments in the
District submitted the following report. [And testimony.] 156pp., 1
map.
                                                            .50

    H.R. rep. no. 1469; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimates of deficiencies submitted by the commissioners, for
1891-'92. June 1, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 253; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the Anacostia and Potomac railroad company for 1891.
2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 38, and H.R. mis. doc. no. 221, 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the Brightwood railway company. January 25, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the Commissioners of the District transmitting
certain information in regard to the Brightwood railway company.
January 28, 1892. 7pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 54; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of the operations of the Capitol, north O street and
south Washington railway company for 1890-'91. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 54; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on the District of Columbia favoring
bill (H.R. 410) to amend the charter of the Eckington and Soldiers'
Home railway company. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 190; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of stockholders of the Georgetown and Tennallytown railway
company. 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 57; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commissioners in regard to the Georgetown
and Tennallytown railway company. May 5, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis doc. no. 143; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Annual report of the Georgetown barge, dock, elevator and railway
company for 1891. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 55; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of the receipts and disbursements of the Metropolitan
railroad company for 189O-'91. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 53; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the Rock Creek railway company for 1891. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 55; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Annual report of the Washington and Georgetown railroad company
for 1891. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 56; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

DIXON, GEORGE O. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Dixon
_v._ U.S. January 25, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DODGE, CHARLES RICHARDS. Recent facts regarding the ramie industry in
America, with brief statements relating to manufacture in Europe, etc.
Reprinted from the report of the statistician for May, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 16pp.
                                                            .10

---- Report of the special agent (of the Department of Agriculture) in
charge of the fibre investigations, 1891. Washington, 1892. 24pp., 2
pls., 11 cuts.
                                                            .25


DORSEY, BENNETT. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill to grant an honorable discharge to B. Dorsey. January 21, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 75; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DORSEY, JAMES OWEN. The Cegiha language. Washington, 1890. 4^o.
xviii+794pp.
                                                           3.00

    U.S. Geog. and geol. survey of the Rocky Mountain Regions:
Contributions to N. America ethnology, vol. vi.

---- Omaha and Ponka letters. Washington, 1891. 127pp.
                                                            .40

    Smithsonian Institution: Bureau of Ethnology.

---- _See_ Riggs, S. J. Dakota-English dictionary, 1890.


DOUGHERTY, C. A. Rights of foreigners in Mexico. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 126-127.


DRILL REGULATIONS. Letter from the Secretary of War recommending the
printing of cavalry and artillery drill regulations for sale. June 1,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex doc. no. 250; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DRY DOCK. Report from the committee on naval affairs favoring bill for
establishment of a dry-dock near Algiers, La. January 27 and February
10, 1892. 3+3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 118 and H.R. rep. no. 251; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DULUTH AND MANITOBA RAILROAD CO. Report from the committee on military
affairs favoring bill granting right of way across the Fort Pembina
reservation in N. Dakota. January 21, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 61; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


DUTTON, CLARENCE EDWARD, _U.S. A._ [Project for a Nicaraguan canal,
with observations thereon.] 1892. 24pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 97; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


EAKINS, LINCOLN GRANT. Seven new meteorites. 7pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 91-98.

---- Analysis of astrophylite. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 119.

---- Analyses of five Chereokee limestones. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 125.

---- Analyses of ores of iron from Virginia, in or near Craig county,
North and South Carolina, Georgia and Alabama, Kentucky. 2pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 125-126.

---- Analyses of ores of manganese from Tennesee, from Barton county,
Georgia. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 128.

---- Analyses of two coals from West Virginia, in Barbour county. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey; Bulletin no. 78, p. 128.


EAKINS, CHATARD, T. M., and STOKES, H. N. Analysis of kaolin from
Arkansas, Alabama, and Georgia. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 120.


EARLL, ROBERT EDWARD. Report upon the exhibit of the Smithsonian
Institution, including the U.S. Nat. Museum, at the centennial
exposition of the Ohio valley and central states, held at Cincinnati in
1888. 26pp.

    U.S. Nat. Mus. rep. 1888-'89, pp. 154-179.


EASTMAN, J. R. Meteorological observations and results at the U.S.
naval observatory, 1883-1887. 4^o. 261pp.
                                                           1.00

    U.S. Naval Observatory: Observations, 1887; appendix 3.


EASTPORT, ME., Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury asking an
appropriation to complete the public building at Eastport. January 27,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 24; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ECKERSON, GEORGE W. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill for the relief of G. W. Eckerson. February 16, 1892.
3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 362; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


EDWARDS, RICHARD M. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to amend the record of R. M. Edwards. February 5, 1892.
7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 109; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- W. H., _Consul-general._ Corn-bread in Germany. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 84-85.


EIGHT-HOUR LAW. Resolution from the committee on labor favoring an
inquiry into the working of the eight-hour law. 1p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 103; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Preliminary report from the committee on labor to accompany H.R.
mis. doc. no. 103. February 24, 1892. 4p.

    H.R. rep. no. 427; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ELECTRICAL COMMISSION. _See_ District of Columbia.


ELECTRIC WIRE UNDERGROUND CONDUITS. Consular reports on underground
conduits in foreign countries. 72pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 139, pp. 739-810.


ELGIN, J. H. Findings of the court of claims in the case of J. H. Elgin
_v._ U.S. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 93; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ELLIS, J. B., and EVERHART, B. M. New species of fungi. 6pp.

    Journal of mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 130-135.


ERICSSON, JOHN. Report from the committee on naval affairs to accompany
bill (S. 835) for the relief of the estate of John Ericsson. January
27, 1892. 6pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 125; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ESCAMBIA LODGE. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
to relinquish the interest of the U.S. to certain land in Pensacola,
Fl., to Escambia Lodge. January 11, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 11; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ESTES, JOHN M. Tobacco: instructions for cultivation and curing.
Washington, 1892. 8pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Farmers' Bulletin no. 6.


EVANS, JOHN. The antiquity of man. From the Smithsonian report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 10pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 822.


EVERMANN, BARTON W. A reconnaissance of the streams and lakes of
western Montana and northwestern Wyoming. (2) A report upon
investigations made in Texas in 1891. 88pp., 36 pls.

    U.S. Fish Com., Report on establishment of fishcultural stations in
Rocky mountains and Gulf regions, 1892.


EWELL, ERVIN E. Cocoa preparations. 58pp., 2 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 13, part 7, pp.
933-990.


EXPERIMENT STATION RECORD. _See_ Agricultural Department, Office of
experiment stations.


EYCHESHYMER, A. C. Club-root in the United States. 10pp., 2 pls.

    Journal of mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 79-83.


FECHET, EUGENE O., _Consul._ The state of Durango, Mexico. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 92-94.


FERNANDINA, FL. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill to erect a public building at Fernandina. January
14, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 29; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FERNOW, BERNARD EDUARD. Timber physics. Part 1. Preliminary report.
Washington, 1892. 4^o. iii, 1-57, ivpp., 6 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Forestry Division: Bulletin no. 6.


FERRON, UTAH. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
for the relief of the inhabitants of the town of Ferron. February 10,
1892. 1p.


FIELD, THOMAS P. A brief history of Amherst college. 21pp., 3 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 250-270.


FISHERIES. Memorial of the Maine commission of sea and shore fisheries
against the use of purse seines in the menhaden and mackerel fisheries.
March 14, 1892. 29pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 96; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FISKE, L. R., _d. d._ History of Albion college, Albion, Mich. 12pp., 2
pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 145-156.


FITZGIBBON, THOMAS. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill to grant an honorable discharge to T. Fitzgibbon.
January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 66; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FLEISCHER, HEINRICH LEBARECHT. Memoir of, by A. Müller. From the
Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington, 1892. 21pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 788.


FLING, FREDERICK M. Mirabeau's speech of May 20, 1790. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. 1890, pp. 53-54.


FLORIDA. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill to pay
balance found to be due Florida. February 10, 1892. 15pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 198; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on claims favoring bill (H.R. 82) for
settling the claim of Florida for suppressing Indian hostilities.
February 11, 1892. 104pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 273; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FORD, PAUL LEICESTER, and CLARK, A. HOWARD. Bibliography of the
writings of the members of the American Historical Association for
1890. 30pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 117-146.

---- ---- Supplementary bibliography of the writings of the members of
the American Historical Association. [_See_ Annual report Am. Hist.
Assoc. for 1889.] 14pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 147-160.

---- R. L., and o'rs. Findings of the court of claims in the case of R.
L. Ford, P. Kelly, O. Walker, T. H. Webb, J. W. Wesson, respectively,
_v._ U.S. February 12, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 78; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FORT GREENE, BROOKLYN, N. Y. Report from the committee on the library
favoring bill for a monument to the memory of the victims of the prison
ship. February 5, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 169; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FORT WALLA WALLA. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the improvement of Fort Walla Walla. February 4,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 167; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FORT WAYNE, MICH. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to provide for the enlargement of the military post at
Fort Wayne. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 164; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FOX, HOWARD, _Consul._ Commerce and industries of Cornwall. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 367-372.


---- THOMAS W., _Consul._ Trade and commerce of Plymouth. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 120-122.


FRANCKE, KUNO. Karl Fallen and the liberal movement in Germany.
(Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 57-58.


FREEDMAN'S HOSPITAL. Report of C. B. Purvis, surgeon-in-chief, to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 10pp.


FREEDMAN'S SAVINGS AND TRUST COMPANY. Annual report of the commissioner
of. Washington, 1891. 12pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 29; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FRESNO, CALIF: Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds, favoring the erection of a public building at Fresno. January
12, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 13; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


FULLER, HOMER T. Worcester polytechnic institute. Sketch. 21pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 320-340.


GAINSVILLE, McCALLISTER AND ST. LOUIS RAILWAY CO. Report from the
committee on Indian affairs favoring bill granting to the G., McC. &
St. L. R.R. co. right of way through Indian territory. February 17,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 386; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GAINSVILLE, OKLAHOMA AND GULF RAILWAY CO. Report from the committee on
Indian affairs favoring bill granting to the G., O. & G. Railway co.
right of way through the Indian territory. February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 387; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GALLOWAY, BEVERLY THOMAS. Suggestions in regard to the treatment of
_cercosfora circums-cissa_. 2pp.

    Journal of Mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 77-78.


GANNETT, HENRY. A dictionary of altitudes in the United States. (Second
edition.) Washington, 1891. 393pp.
                                                            .50

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 76.


GARDNER, WALTER E., _Consul._ American oleo oil in the Netherlands.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 85-86.


GAUGERS, ETC. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of certain gaugers and other internal revenue employés who
rendered service before qualification. February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 371; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GAUGER'S MANUAL. _See_ Treasury Dep't, Internal Revenue.


GEIKEL, JAMES. Glacial geology. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 10pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 807.


GENDRON IRON WHEEL CO. Report from the committee on claims favoring
bill for the relief of the Gendron Iron Wheel Company of Toledo, Ohio.
(For excess of duty.) February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 356; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GEORTH, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS. The minerals of North Carolina. Washington,
1891. 119pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 74.


GERMAIN, V. J. On the teaching of domestic economy and needlework. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1117-1122.


GIDDINGS, NAPOLEON B. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of N. B. Giddings. January 14, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 24; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GILBERT, CHARLES H. Scientific results of explorations by the U.S. Fish
Commission steamer _Albatross_. XXII. Descriptions of 34 new species of
fishes collected in 1888 and 1889, principally among the Santa Barbara
islands and in the Gulf of California. From Proceedings of the U.S.
Nat. Mus., v. xiv, pp. 539-566. [No. 880.] Washington, 1891. 27pp.


---- GROVE KARL. The history of the Niagara river. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 29pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian Pub. no. 808.


GILL, THEODORE. Note on the genus _Hiatula_ of Lacépède or _Tautoga_ of
Mitchell. From Proceedings Nat. Mus., v. xiv, p. 695. [No. 883.] 1p.

---- Notes on the _Tetraodontoidea_. From Proceedings U.S. Nat. Mus.,
v. xiv, pp. 705-720. [No. 886.] Washington, 1892. 16pp., 1 pl.

---- Notes on the genus _Chonerhinus_ or _Xenopterus_. From Proceedings
    U.S. Nat. Mus., v. xiv, pp. 697-699. [No. 884.] 3pp.

---- On the genus _Gnathanacanthus_ of Bleeker. From Proceedings U.S.
Nat. Mus., v. xiv, pp. 701-704. [No. 885.] 4pp.


GOLDSCHMIDT, JULIUS, _Consul-General_. The international statistical
congress at Vienna in 1891. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 175-181.


GOODE, GEORGE BROWN. Bibliographies of American naturalists. V. The
published writings of Dr. Charles Girard. Washington, 1891. vi, 141
pp., portrait.
                                                            .40

    U.S. National Museum: Bulletin no. 41.

---- Report on the condition and progress of the U.S. Nat. Museum
during the year ending June 30, 1889. From the report of the Nat. Mus.
1888-'89, pp. 1-277. Washington, 1891. 279pp., 4 pls.
                                                            .75

---- The museums of the future. From the report of the Nat. Mus.,
1888-'89, pp. 427-445. Washington, 1891. 21pp.
                                                            .10


GOOSE LAKE, OREGON. Letter from the attorney-general in relation to the
effort to drain Goose Lake in the states of Oregon and California. May
2, 1892. 12pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 91; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GORDY, J. P. Rise and growth of the normal school idea in the United
States. Washington, 1891. 145pp.
                                                            .50

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 8,
    1891.


GOSEHORN, SARAH. Findings of the court of claims in the case of
Gosehorn _v._ U.S. February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 63; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE. Report to the Secretary of the
Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 80pp., 6 pls.


GRAND ARMY. Communication from the commissioners of the District of
Columbia recommending an appropriation for the reception and
entertainment of the Grand Army of the Republic. March 25, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 173; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of G. H. Thomas Post no. 13 in relation to certification
of veterans by the U.S. Civil Service Commission. March 2, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 87; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GRANT, CHESTER F. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to grant an honorable discharge to C. F. Grant. February
5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 107; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GRAY, ASA. Plates prepared between the years 1849 and 1859 to accompany
a report on the forest trees of N. America. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 4pp.,
23 col. pls.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 800.


---- JAMES G. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to remove charge of desertion against J. G. Gray. February 5,
1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 106; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GREELY, ADOLPHUS WASHINGTON, _U.S. A._ International pressure and storm
charts. 31pp., 25 charts.

    War Dep't, Signal Office: Annual report 1891, appendix no. 17.

---- Diurnal fluctuations of atmospheric pressure at twenty-nine
selected stations in the United States. Washington, 1891. v, 15pp. 4^o.

    War Dep't, Signal office.

---- Report on the climatic conditions of the state of Texas.
Washington, 1892. 4^o. 120pp., 23 charts.
                                                            .75

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report on the climatology of the arid regions of the United States
with reference to irrigation. Washington, 1891. 356pp., 43 maps and
pls.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 287; 51st Cong., 2d sess.

---- Charts showing the "probability of rainy days" prepared from
observations of eighteen years. Washington, 1891. 12 charts, folio.

    War Dep't, Signal office.

---- Normal temperature charts by decades for the United States and the
Dominion of Canada. Washington, 1891. 72 charts, folio.

    War Dep't, Signal office.

---- Discussion of the international simultaneous meteorological
observations 1878-1887 with reference to monthly mean barometric
pressures, prevailing winds, change of pressures from month to month,
and monthly storm frequency of the northern hemisphere, with 25 charts.

    War Dep't, Signal office report 1891, Appendix no. 17.

---- Charts showing "average monthly cloudiness" in the United States.
Washington, 1891. 12 charts, folio.

    War Dep't, Signal office.

---- Charts showing "isobars, isotherms, and wind" in the United States
for each month from January, 1871, to December, 1873. Washington, 1891.
36 charts. 4^o.

    War Dep't, Signal office.

---- International monthly charts of mean pressures and wind directions
at 7 a. m. Washington mean time for 1882 and 1883. Washington, 1891. 24
charts, folio.

    War Dep't, Signal office.


GREENE, NATHANIEL. Report from the committee on the library favoring
bill to erect a monument to Gen. Greene. February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 472; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GREGORY, J. W. The underwaters of the great plains. 46pp. 6 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't: Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 4, pp. 3-48pp.


GRICE, JOHN, and o'rs. Findings of the court of claims in the causes of
J. Grice, J. Wysong, B. K. White, and Elizabeth Gunnell, respectively,
_v._ U.S. February 9, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 74; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GRIFFIN, APPLETON PRENTISS CLARK. Bibliography of the historical
societies of the United States. 107pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 161-267.


---- WALTER T. Barnyard manures. 5pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 253-257.


GRIFFITHS, G. S. Antarctic explorations. From the Smithsonian report
for 1890. Washington, 1891. 14pp.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 811.


GRINNELL, WILLIAM F. American hard woods in England. 5pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 19-23.


GROAT, ABRAM. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of A. Groat. (Desertion.) March 1, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 498; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


_GROSS, CHARLES._ A plea for reform in the study of English municipal
history. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 51-52.


GROW, GALUSHA A., and RANDALL, SAMUEL J. Addresses on the presentation
of portraits of speakers Grow and Randall, in the H.R., 52d congress,
1st sess. Washington, 1892. 48pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 141; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GRUNSKY, C. E. Methods of applying water to land, as practiced in the
central portions of California. 16pp., 18 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry, 1892, t. 1, pp. 307-322.


GUENTHER, RICHARD, _Consul-general_. Mexican development and commerce.
10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 111-120.


GUILD, MARION PELTON. Historical sketch of Wellesley college. 22pp., 4
pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 420-441.


GUINEAN, THOMAS. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of T. Guinean. (Refund of purchase money for land sold by
    U.S.) February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 380; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


GURLEY, R. W. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of the estate of R. W. Gurley. (Arrearages of salary.) January
27, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 117; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HALE, J. H. Tropic and semitropic fruits and nuts. 4^o. 18pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 161.


HALL, ASAPH. Observations of double stars made at the U.S. naval
observatory. Part second, 1880-1891. Washington, 1892. 4^o. 203pp.

    U.S. Naval Observatory: Washington observations, 1889, appendix 1.
_Note_: Part 1 was published in 1881 as appendix vi, Washington obs.
for 1877.


HALLOCK, WILLIAM. Preliminary note on the coefficients of thermal
expansion of certain rocks. 10pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 109-118.


HAM, JAMES S. Report from the committee on finance favoring bills for
the relief of heirs of J. S. Ham and J. W. Vose. (To redeem stolen U.S.
bonds.) February 8, 1892. 13pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 172; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HANNA, PHILIP C., _Consul._ American trade in Venezuela. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 183-186.


HANSON, WILLIS F. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of W. F. Hanson. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 201; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HARRINGTON, LOUISA. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of Louisa Harrington. (For wood.) February 5, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 120; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HARRINGTON, MARK W. Meteorological work for agricultural institutions.
Washington, 1892. 23pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Experiment station bulletin no. 10.


HARRIS, WILLIAM T., _ll. d._ The influence of the public schools. Do
the public schools educate children beyond the position which they must
occupy in life? 7pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 589-596.

---- Historic ornament. Why drawing teachers should teach historic
ornament. 4pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1313-1316.

---- The psychology of manual training. 14pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 903-916.

---- The intellectual value of tool work. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 937-942.


HASKELL, SAMUEL, _d. d._ Kalamazoo college, Kalamazoo, Mich. Sketch.
5pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 133-137.


HASKINS, CHARLES H. The Yazoo land companies. (Abstract.) 1p.

    Am. Hist. Ass'n rep. 1890, p. 82.


HAVENS, EZRA S. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of E. S. Havens. (For pay and allowances.) January
14, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 23; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HAWES, JOHN B., _Consul_. The streets and roads of Bohemia. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 459-500.


HAXTHAUSEN, JOSEPH. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of J. Haxthausen. (For overpaid special taxes.) February
5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 89; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HAY, ROBERT. Final geological reports of the artesian and underflow
investigation between the 97th meridian of longitude and the foothills
of the Rocky mountains, to the Secretary of Agriculture. Washington,
1892. 209pp., 19 pls.
                                                            .75

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation Inquiry 1892, pt. 3, pp. 41-166.


HAYFORD, JOHN FILLMORE. Physical hydrography. On the use of
observations of currents for prediction purposes. Appendix no. 14.
Report of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey for 1890. Washington,
1891. 15pp.
                                                            .15

---- Physical hydrography. Tides at Sandy Hook, observed and predicted
times and heights during the year 1889. Washington, 1891. 12pp, 2
charts.
                                                            .15


HAZEN, G.M. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of G. M. Hazen, and o'rs. (Rents for army purposes.) January 27,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 115; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HEALY, JOHN F., _Consul_. Orchilla weed in Madeira. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 383-384.


HEARD, AUGUSTINE, _Consul-General_. Korean paper. 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, p. 44.

---- The new currency of Korea, 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, p. 164.


HEARRELL, L. B. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Hearrell
_v._ U.S. January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


HELMHOLTZ, ROBERT VON. Memoir of Gustav Robert Kerchoff. From the
Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington, 1890. 16pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian Pub. no. 791.


HEMMICK, ROLAND J., _Consul_. Labor in Geneva. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 203-205.


HENNESSY, HENRY. On the physical structure of the earth. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 21pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian Pub. no. 806.


HENSHAW, SAMUEL. Report upon the gipsey moth in Massachusetts. 8pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Div. of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 75-82.


HERR, AUSTIN H. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of A. H. Herr. (For use and occupation.) January 21, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 95; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HERSHE, BENJAMIN F. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill for the relief of B. F. Hershe. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 200; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HICKS, L. E. On the underflow and sheet waters, irrigable lands and
geological structure of Nebraska, with its effect upon the water
supply. 24pp., 5 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 3. pp. 191-209.


HILL, FRANK D., _Consul_. The vine in Uruguay. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 141-144.


---- ROBERT THOMAS. On the occurrence of artesian and other underground
waters in Texas, eastern New Mexico, and Indian Territory west of the
97th meridian. 126pp., 18 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 3, pp. 167-190.

HILLEBRAND, WILLIAM FRANCIS. On the occurrence of nitrogen in
uraninite, and on the composition of uraninite in general. 38pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 43-80.

---- Analysis of kyanite from Clip, Arizona. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 120.

---- Analysis of picrullumogene, from Las Vegas, New Mexico, [and] of
brochantite from Arizona. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 121.

---- Analysis of feldspars from Minnesota gabros. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 122.

---- Analysis of brass used in standards of the U.S. bureau of weights
and measures. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 129.


---- and HOWARD, E. L. Analysis of water from Webster Grove, Mo. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 129.

---- ---- Analysis of liebenerite? a massive white mineral from the
Brown tin mine, Rapid City, South Dakota, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 120.


HINTON, RICHARD J. A report on irrigation and the cultivation of the
soil thereby, with physical data, conditions, and progress within the
    U.S. for 1891. Part 1. Washington, 1892. 459pp., 50 pls.
                                                           1.25

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 41, part 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    _Note:_ Part 2 of this report is by E. S. Nettleton; part 3, by
    Robt. Hay; part 4, by J. W. Gregory and F. F. B. Coffin.

---- Report of the special agent in charge of the artesian and
underflow investigations and of the irrigation inquiry, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 15pp., map.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 439-450.

---- Facts and conditions relating to irrigation in various countries.
58pp., 1 pl.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 1, pp. 375-432.


HOFFMAN, WALTER JAMES. The Mid[=e]'wi-win or "Grand medicine Society"
of the Ojibwa. 158pp., 22 pls.

    Smithsonian Institution: Bureau of Ethnology, 7th annual report, pp.
143-300.


HOLLCROFT, E. P. T. Report from the committee on claims favoring the
issue of duplicate bonds of the U.S. to E. P. T. Hollcroft, guardian of
B. J. Barr. February 6, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 91; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HOLLIS, GEORGE F., _Consul_. South African sheep and goats. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 34-36.


HOLLOWAY, J. B. Digest of claims referred by congress to the court of
claims, from the 48th to the 51st congress, inclusive, for a finding of
facts under the provisions of the "Bowman act" of March 3, 1883.
Washington, 1892. 127pp.
                                                           1.00


HOLMAN, SILAS W. Massachusetts institute of technology. Sketch. 40pp.,
3 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 280-319.


HOLMES, GEORGE K.. and LORD, JOHN S. Statistics of farms, homes, and
mortgages. Ownership of debt in Kansas, and Ohio and Nebraska. 28+12pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Extra Bulletin nos. 18 and 20.


HOOGEWERFF, J. A., <sc>_U.S. N._</sc> Magnetic observations at the U.S.
naval observatory, 1890. 4^o. 99pp., 4 pls.
                                                           1.00

    U.S. Naval Observatory: Observations, 1887; appendix 2.


HOPKINS, A. D. Some bred West Virginia _braconidæ_. 4pp.

    Insect life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 256-259.


HORN, FRITZ. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs on
bill for the relief of F. Horn. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 209; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HORNE, SAMUEL B., _Consul_. Foreign trade of Santa Cruz. 5pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 11-15.


HORSFALL, T. C. The use of pictures and other works of art in
elementary schools. 11pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and Industry, pt. 2, pp. 716-726.


HOSACK, W. S. Adverse report from the committee on claims on bill for
the relief of Dr. W. S. Hosack. (For difference in pay.) February 16,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 378; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HOT SPRINGS RESERVATION. Report of the Superintendent to the Secretary
of the Interior 1891. Washington, 1891. 39pp.


HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Alphabetical list of members and delegates of
the House of Representatives, and the standing and select committees of
which they are members. 52d Congress, 1st session; 1891-'92. 15pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Standing and select committees of the House of Representatives,
52d Congress, 1st sess. 16pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on accounts in the matter of clerks to
House committees. January 13, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on accounts on resolution to appoint
special messengers for the House. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 248; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on accounts on rent of branch folding
room. February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 269; 52d Cong., 1st sess.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., MARCH, 1892.    No. 3.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.

CATALOGUE.

MARCH, 1892.


HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES--_Continued._

---- Report from the committee on accounts on resolution to appoint W.
F. Halleck an assistant doorkeeper. February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 293; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Clerk. Report of the clerk of the House of Representatives.
Employés and expenditures, July, 1890, to December, 1891. 214pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Communication from the clerk of the H.R., with an inventory
of the property of the U.S. in his possession. December 16, 1891. 3pp.

    H.R. Mis. Doc. No. 9; 52d Cong., 1st Sess.

---- ---- Letter from the clerk reporting that he has completed the
indexing of private claims presented to the 49th-51st Congresses.
January 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 31; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the clerk transmitting a list of contests for
seats in the 52d Congress. January 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 32; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the clerk of the House showing the condition of
the contingent fund. April 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 161; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Doorkeeper. Communication from the doorkeeper (H.R.) transmitting
inventory of books, maps, etc., in the folding room of the House.
December 19, 1891. 8pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 10; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the doorkeeper (H.R.) with a report of the sales
of waste paper, etc. December 16, 1891. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the doorkeeper (H.R.) with a statement of the
property in his charge belonging to the U.S. December 16, 1891. 17pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 8; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the sergeant-at-arms (H.R.) with an account of
property of the U.S. in his possession. December 16, 1891. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 7; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HOUSTON, WILLIAM. The legislative work of the first parliament of Upper
Canada. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 43-44.


HOWLAND, LELAND O. The biology of the hymenopterous insects of the
family _chalcididæ_. From Proceedings of the U.S. Nat. Mus., v. xiv,
pp. 567-588. [No. 881.] Washington, 1892. 21pp.

---- The habits of _elasmus_. 2pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 253-254.


---- ERNEST LINCOLN. Analysis of hematite nodule from New Mexico, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 127.


---- WALTER E. The British tin-plate trade. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 1-4.


HOWARD UNIVERSITY. Report of the secretary and treasurer to the
Secretary of the Interior. 1891. Washington, 1891. 5pp.


HUBBARD, ROYAL M. Report from the committee on post-offices and
post-roads favoring bill for the relief of R. M. Hubbard, postmaster,
for clerk-hire. January 27, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 122; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HUNT, SAMUEL F. The University of Cincinnati, Ohio. Sketch. 11pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 171-181.


HUNTING, GEORGE T., _d. d._ Alma college, Alma, Mich. Sketch. 2pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 164-165.


HUTCHINSON AND SOUTHERN RAILROAD. Report from the committee on Indian
affairs favoring bill to amend "an act granting the right of way to the
Hutchinson and Southern railroad company to construct a railroad from
Anthony, Kans., through the Indian Territory to some point in Grayson
county, Texas." January 19, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


HYDE, JOHN. Flax [and] hemp production. 24pp. 4^o.

    U.S. Census 1890: Bulletin no. 177.


IMMIGRATION. Report from the committee on immigration favoring
resolution for immigration investigation. February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 411; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


INDIAN TERRITORY. Report from the committee on territories favoring
bill (H.R. 249) to regulate mines and mining in the Indian territory.
February 5, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 162; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


INSECT LIFE. _See_ Agricultural Department, Division of Entomology.


INTERCONTINENTAL RAILWAY COMMISSION. Minutes. [Dec. 4, 1890, to April
21, 1891.] Washington 1891. 4^o. 132pp., map.
                                                           1.00

_Note:_ In English and Spanish.


INTERCONTINENTAL RAILWAY. Estimate of an appropriation to pay salaries
of the three U.S. Commissioners. February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 113; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


INTERIOR DEPARTMENT. Report of the Secretary of the Interior for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 171pp.
                                                            .25

---- Report of the Secretary of the Interior; being part of the message
and documents, 1st session, 52d congress. In five vols. Vol. 3.
Washington, 1892. 679pp.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, pt. 5, v. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

_Note:_ Contains Reports of Commissioner of pensions; Superintendent of
the census; Commissioner of patents; Commissioner of railroads;
Territorial governors, etc.

---- List of employés in the department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified service, and who are not
specifically authorized by law. April 20, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 81; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of the expenditures of the contingent appropriations for
the department for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1891. 18pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Additional estimates of deficiencies in appropriations for
1891-'92 and prior years. February 13, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. ex. doc no. 131; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Bureau of Education. Annual statement of the commissioner of
education to the Secretary of the Interior. 1891. W. T. Harris,
commissioner. Washington, 1891. 21pp.

---- ---- Report of the commissioner of education for the year
1888-'89. Washington, 1891. 2 vols.
                                                           1.50

---- ---- Publications of the U.S. Bureau of Education, from 1867 to
1890, with subject-index. Washington, 1891. 101pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- A catalogue of educational literature, part 1. Analytical
index to Barnard's Journal of Education. [31 vols. 1855-1881. Edited by
Henry Barnard, ll. d.] Washington, 1892. 128pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Special report on public libraries, part 2. Rules for a
dictionary catalogue by C. A. Cutter. 3d edition, with corrections and
additions. Washington, 1891. 140pp.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- Art and industry. Instruction in drawing applied to the
industrial and fine arts, as given in the colleges of agriculture and
the mechanic arts, and in the public schools, etc., in the U.S. By
Isaac Edwards Clarke. Part ii. Industrial and manual training in public
schools. Washington, 1891. cxlviii, 1-1338pp.
                                                           1.50

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 209, part 2; 46th Cong., 2d sess.

---- ---- Circular of information no. 1, 1891. Contributions to
American educational history. Edited by H. B. Adams. No. 10. Higher
education in Indiana. By J. A. Woodburn. Washington, 1891. 200pp., 32
pls.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- _Same._ No. 2, 1891. The fourth international prison
congress, St. Petersburg, Russia. By C. D. Randall. Washington, 1891.
253pp., 15 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- _Same._ No. 3, 1891. Sanitary conditions for schoolhouses. By
A. P. Marble. Washington, 1891. 121pp., 81 pls.
                                                            .75

---- ---- _Same._ No. 4, 1891. Contributions to American educational
history, edited by H. B. Adams. No. 11. History of higher education in
Michigan. By A. C. McLaughlin. Washington, 1891. 178pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- _Same._ No. 5, 1891. Contributions to American educational
history, edited by H. B. Adams. No. 12. The history of higher education
in Ohio. By G. W. Knight and J. R. Commons. Washington, 1891. 258pp.,
44 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- _Same._ No. 6, 1891. Contributions to American educational
history, edited by H. B. Adams. No. 13. History of higher education in
Massachusetts. By G. G. Bush. Washington, 1891. 445pp., 33 pls.
                                                           1.25

---- ---- _Same._ No. 7, 1891. Promotions and examinations in graded
schools. By E. E. White. Washington, 1891. 64pp.
                                                            .25

---- ---- _Same._ No. 8, 1891. Rise and growth of the normal school
idea in the United States. By J. P. Gordy. Washington, 1891. 145pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Same._ No. 9, 1891. Biological teaching in the colleges of
the United States. By J. P. Campbell. Washington, 1891. 183pp.
                                                            .75

---- ---- _Same._ No. 1, 1892. Southern women in the recent educational
movement in the South. By A. D. Mayo. Washington, 1892. 300pp.
                                                           1.00

---- Census Office. A permanent census bureau. Letter from the
Secretary of the Interior transmitting a report from the superintendent
of the census. December 8, 1891. Washington, 1891. iv+185pp.

---- ---- Communication from the Secretary of the Interior asking
immediate action upon the estimate for an appropriation of $1,000,000
for the eleventh census. January 6, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Report from the committee on appropriations favoring bill
appropriating $200,000 to continue work of the 11th census. February 4,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 9; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Census Bulletin no. 158. February 2, 1892. 4^o. 33pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of Manufacture: 1890. District of Columbia.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 159. February 5, 1892. 4^o. 42pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of churches.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 160. February 9, 1892. 4^o. 14pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Transportation: Railway statistics. Group vii.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 161. February 11, 1892. 4^o. 18pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Horticulture.--Tropic and semi-tropic fruits and nuts.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 162. February 13, 1892. 4^o. 41pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Finances of Maine.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 163. February 15, 1892. 4^o. 24pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Irrigation in Nevada.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 164. February 16, 1892. 4^o. 15pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Transportation: Railway statistics. Group viii.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 165. February 19, 1892. 4^o. 21pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Population of places having 1,000 inhabitants or more in 1890.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 166. February 23, 1892. 4^o. 8pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Mineral product of the United States.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 167. March 4, 1892. 4^o. 25pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Fisheries of the Pacific States.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 168. March 7, 1892. 4^o. 6pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Manufactures.--Iron and steel. Production of the cast-iron pipe
    foundries.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 169. March 8, 1892. 4^o. 12pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of manufactures.--The wool industry.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 170. March 9, 1892. 4^o. 53pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of manufactures: 1890. City of St. Louis, Missouri.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 171. March 15, 1892. 4^o. 15pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Transportation: Railway statistics. Group ix.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 172. March 16, 1892. 4^o. 14pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Transportation: Railway statistics. Group x.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 173. March 18, 1892. 63pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Fisheries of the great lakes.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 174. March 28, 1892. 47pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of churches.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 175. April 8, 1892. 4^o. 20pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Population by color, sex, and general nativity: 1890.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 176. April 14, 1892. 4^o. 4pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Summary of national, state, and local indebtedness.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 177. April 19, 1892. 24pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Flax and hemp.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 178. April 23, 1892. 4^o. 26pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Irrigation in Oregon.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 179. April 26, 1892. 4^o. 10pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Transportation. Transportation by water in the U.S.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 181. April 29, 1892. 4^o. 5pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal production 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 183. May 14, 1892. 20pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Population by color, sex, and general nativity.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 184. May 21, 1892. 4pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal production in 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 185. May 23, 1892. 3pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal production in 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 186. May 24, 1892. 5pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal productions in 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 187. May 25, 1892. 19pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Population by color, sex, and general nativity, 1890.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 188. May 26, 1892. 5pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal production in 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 189. May 27, 1892. 3pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cereal production in 1889.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 190. June 2, 1892. 7pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cotton production.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 191. June 3, 1892. 8pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Cotton production.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 192. June 4, 1892. 4pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Assessed valuation of property, 1890.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 193. June 11, 1892. 27pp. 4^o.

    CONTENTS.

    Agriculture: Artesian wells for irrigation.

---- ---- Extra Census Bulletin. No. 17. April 7, 1892. 4^o. 48pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Insurance business in the United States.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 18. April 8, 1892. 4^o. 28pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of farms, homes, and mortgages. Ownership of debt in
    Kansas and Ohio.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 19. April 30, 1892. 4^o. 29pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Dwellings and families in 1890.

---- ---- _The same._ No. 20. May 3, 1892. 4^o. 12pp.

    CONTENTS.

    Statistics of farms, homes and mortgages. Mortgages in Nebraska.

---- Indian Office. Report of the Commissioner of Indian affairs to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 210pp.
                                                            .25

---- ---- Sixtieth annual report of the Commissioner of Indian affairs
to the Secretary of the Interior, 1891. [With appendices.] Washington,
1891. 2 vols.
                                                           1.50

---- ---- Estimate of an appropriation for transcribing in the Indian
office. February 17, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 133; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Estimates of deficiencies in appropriations for the Indian
service for 1891-'92. February 26, 1892. 9pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 145; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Communication from the commissioner as to the importance of a
chief clerk for the office of Indian affairs. April 13, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 193; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Land Office. Annual report of the commissioner of the general land
office for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1891: dated September 23,
1891. Washington, 1891. 66pp., map.
                                                            .25

---- ---- _The same._ With appendices. Washington, 1891. 431pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Rules of practice in cases before the United States district
land offices, the general land office, and the Department of the
Interior. Approved August 13, 1885. [Reprint.] Washington, 1892. 21pp.,
1 l.
                                                            .20

---- ---- Digest of decisions of the Department of the Interior and
general land office in cases relating to public lands, vols. 1 to 10,
inclusive. Prepared by S. V. Proudfit, reporter. Washington, 1891.
451pp.
                                                           2.00

---- ---- Circular from the general land office showing the manner of
proceeding to obtain title to public lands under the pre-emption,
homestead, and other laws. Issued February 6, 1892. Washington, 1892.
256pp.
                                                            .75

---- ---- United States mining laws and regulations thereunder.
Approved December 10, 1891. [Washington, 1892.] 37pp.
                                                            .20

---- ---- Regulations concerning railroads claiming right of way over
the public lands; also, concerning right of way of ditch or canal
owners over the public lands and reservations for the purpose of
irrigation. Approved March 21, 1892. Washington, 1892. 13pp.
                                                            .10

---- Patent Office. Annual report of the commissioner of patents to
Congress for the year ending December 31, 1891. Washington, 1892.
20pp., 2 fol. l., 3 pls.
                                                            .25

---- ---- Rules of the United States Patent Office. Revised April 1,
1892. [Washington, 1892.] 108pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .50

---- ---- United States statutes concerning the protection of
trade-marks and labels, with the rules of the Patent Office relating
thereto. Edition of January 4, 1892. [Washington, 1892.] 31pp.
                                                            .25

---- ---- Specifications and drawings of patents issued by the United
States Patent Office during January-May, 1891. (2 vols. each month.)
Washington, 1891. 10 vols. impl. 8^o. Per vol. 12.00

---- ---- _Official Gazette_ [Weekly] of the United States Patent
office, vols. 58-59. January-June, 1892. Washington, 1892. 2 vols.
impl. 8^o. Per vol.
                                                           2.75

---- ---- Letter from the Secretary of the Interior relative to the
condition of the rooms occupied by the Patent Office. March 21, 1892.
8pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 61; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Pension Office. Report of the commissioner of pensions to the
Secretary of the Interior for the year ended June 30, 1891. Washington,
1891. 84pp.
                                                            .20

---- ---- Pensions and pension appeals. Report of assistant secretary
Bussey to the Secretary of the Interior for 1891. 12pp.

---- ---- Report from the committee on rules favoring resolution to
investigate alleged charges against the pension bureau. February 10,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 257; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Additional estimate of deficiency in appropriation for fees
and expenses of examining surgeons. April 29, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 217; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- U.S. Geographical and Geological Survey of the Rocky Mountain
Region. Contributions to N. American ethnology, vol. 6. Washington,
1890. xviii+794pp.
                                                           3.00

    CONTENTS.

    The Cehiga language. By J. O. Dorsey.

---- _Same._ Contributions to N. American Ethnology, v. 7. Washington,
1892. 4^o. x, 1-665pp.
                                                           3.00

    CONTENTS.

    A Dakota English Dictionary. By S. R. Riggs. Edited by J. O.
    Dorsey. Washington, 1890.

---- U.S. Geological Survey. Tenth annual report. 1888-'89. Part i.
Geology. [Part ii, Irrigation.] Washington, 1890. 2 vols.
                                                           3.00

---- --- Eleventh annual report. 1889-'90. Part ii, Irrigation.
Washington, 1891. xiv+395pp., 30 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- Monographs. Vol. xvi. Washington, 1889. 4^o. 340pp., 53 pls.
1.00

---- ---- Bulletins nos. 66-70. [Contents already noted.] Washington,
1892. 321pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 71. Washington, 1892. 2 l., v+744pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 22; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ Nos. 72-75. [Contents already noted.] Washington,
1892. 660pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 23; 51st Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 76. [Contents already noted.] Washington, 1892.
393pp.
                                                            .25

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 24; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ Nos. 77-80. [Contents already noted.] Washington,
1892. 494pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. --; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ Nos. 81 and 82. [Contents already noted.] Washington,
1892. 720pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ [Separate.] Nos. 71-83 and 91. [For contents _see_
    U.S. Geological Survey.] Washington, 1891.

---- ---- Suggestions for the preparation of manuscript and
illustrations for publication by the Survey. By W. A. Croffut. January,
1892. 15pp.


INTERNAL REVENUE. Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring
bill (H.R. 566) to amend the internal revenue laws. February 5, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 159; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


INTERNATIONAL PRISON CONGRESS. _See_ Randall, C. D.


INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION. Fifth annual report of the commission.
December 1, 1891. Washington, 1892. 414pp., map.
                                                .75, cloth 1.00

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 31; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Additional estimate of appropriation for the commission. March 23,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 170; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés of the commission, not specifically appropriated
for. April 26, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 140; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


IRRIGATION. Report from the select committee on irrigation of arid
lands to accompany bill (H.R. 6790) for the reclamation of arid lands
of the U.S. [With views of the minority.] March 9, 1892. 12pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 569; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _See_, also, Agricultural Dep't; also, War Dep't, Signal Office.


IRRIGATION CONGRESS. Memorial of a convention held at Salt Lake in 1891
to consider matters pertaining to the reclamation of arid lands. 5pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 61; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

IRVING, ROLAND DUER, and VAN HISE, CHARLES RICHARD. The Penokee
iron-bearing series of Michigan and Wisconsin. 168pp., 23 pls.

    U.S. Geol. Survey, Tenth annual report, 1888-'89, pp. 341-508.


IRWIN, J. C., & CO. Adverse report from the committee on claims on bill
for the relief of J. C. Irwin & Co., and C. A. Perry & Co. January 27,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 126; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ITALY. Changes in customs tariff. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular reports no. 136, pp. 156-157.


JAY, JOHN. The demand for education in American history. 22pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 15-36.


JOHNSON, JOSEPH. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of J. Johnson. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 64; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- W. H. Denison university. Sketch. 8pp.

    Int. Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 157-164.


JONES, AQUILLA. Reports from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of Aquilla Jones. February 4 and 12, 1892. 16+2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 14, pts. 1-2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- JOHN H., and HARRIS, THOMAS D. Report from the committee on claims
favoring bill for the relief of the representatives of Jones and
Harris. February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 150; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


JORDAN, DAVID STARR, and DAVIS, B. M. A preliminary review of the
apodal fishes or eels inhabiting the waters of America and Europe.
[Extracted from the report of the U.S. Fish Commission for 1888.]
Washington, 1891. 97pp., 9 pls.


JOURNAL OF MYCOLOGY. _See_ Agricultural Department, Division of
vegetable pathology.


JUDGE, HENRY. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs on
bill for the relief of H. Judge. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 70; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


JUSTICE DEPARTMENT. Estimate of a deficiency appropriation for the
Department of Justice. February 15, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 35; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimates of deficiencies on account of appropriations under the
control of the Department. April 19, 1892. 31pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 201; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés in the department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified civil service, and who are
not specifically authorized by law. April 7, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 66; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


KEACH, ALBERT. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to remove the charge of desertion from A. Keach. February 16,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 357; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


KEEFE, MICHAEL. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
removal of the charge of desertion against M. Keefe. February 5, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 94; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


KEIGHTLEY, WILLIAM W. Report from the committee on post-offices and
post-roads favoring bill for the relief of W. W. Keightley.
(Compensation as postmaster.) January 27, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 121; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


KELLOGG, JAMES C., _Consul._ Beet sugar manufacture in Germany. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 216-217.


KELTIE, J. SCOTT. Stanley and the map of Africa. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 17pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 810.


KLAMATH RIVER RESERVATION. Report from the committee on Indian affairs
favoring bill (H.R. 38) providing for the sale of lands known as the
Klamath river reservation. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 161; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


KNIGHT, GEORGE W., and COMMONS, JOHN R. The history of higher education
in Ohio. Washington, 1891. 258pp., 44 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891.


KNOWLES, HORACE G., _Consul._ The beet-sugar industry of France. 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, p. 512.

---- French wine crop of 1891. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 159-161.


KUMMELL, CHARLES HUGO. Mathematics. On approximate method of computing
probable error. By C. H. Kummell. (2) On the determination by least
squares of the relation between two variables. By M. Merriman. Appendix
no. 13. Report of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 4^o. 8pp.
                                                            .20


KURTZ, PHILIP. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to grant an honorable discharge to P. Kurtz. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 157; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LABOR DEPARTMENT. Sixth annual report of the commissioner of labor,
1890. Cost of production: iron, steel, coal, etc. Washington, 1891. x,
1-1404pp.
                                                           1.50

_Note:_ "This report relates to the cost of producing iron and steel
and the materials of which iron is made, in the United States and in
Europe."

---- List of employés not specifically appropriated for. April 7, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 120; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of all moneys expended in the department for 1890-'91.
1p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 27; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LAGERHEIM, G. DE. Remarks on the fungus of a potato scab. 2pp.

    Journal of Mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 103-104.


LANGLEY, SAMUEL PIERPONT. Experiments in aerodynamics. Washington,
1891. 4^o. ii, 1-115pp., 10 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Smithsonian pub. no. 801.


LAWS, Public. [Passed at the 1st session of the 52d Congress, 1891-'92]
viz:

---- No. 1. An act fixing the times for holding the district and
circuit courts of the United States in the northern district of Iowa.
Approved January 22, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 2. An act providing for the completion of the allotment of
lands to the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Indians. Approved January 28, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 3. An act to amend an act entitled "An act granting the right
of way to the Hutchison and Southern Railroad Company through the
Indian Territory. Approved February 3, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 4. To amend an act entitled "An act to amend the general
incorporation law of the District of Columbia," approved May 17, 1882.
Approved February 9, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 5. An act to detach Montgomery county from the western and add
it to the eastern district of Arkansas. Approved February 9, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 6. An act to provide for the creation of a fourth judicial
district in the Territory of Utah. Approved February 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 7. An act to amend an act entitled "An act for the
construction of a railroad and wagon bridge across the Mississippi
river at South Saint Paul, Minnesota," approved April 26, 1890.
Approved February 15, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 8. An act to change the corporate name of the National Safe
Deposit Company, of Washington. Approved February 18, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 9. An act to extend the privileges of the transportation of
dutiable merchandise without appraisement to the port of Sandusky,
Ohio. Approved February 26, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 10. An act to constitute Newark, New Jersey, a port of
immediate transportation. Approved March 8, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 11. An act making appropriations to supply a deficiency in the
appropriation for the expenses of the eleventh census, and for other
purposes. Approved March 8, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 12. An act to provide an additional mode of taking depositions
of witnesses in causes pending in the courts of the United States.
Approved March 9, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 13. An act to provide for a term of the circuit and district
court at Littleton, New Hampshire. Approved March 10, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 14. An act ratifying the act of the 16th legislative assembly
of Arizona, approved March 19, 1891, making appropriation in aid of
Arizona's exhibit at the World's Columbian Exposition. Approved March
18, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 15. An act making appropriations to supply a deficiency in the
Department of Agriculture, and for other purposes. Approved March 18,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 16. An act to provide for certain of the most urgent
deficiencies in the appropriations for the service of the Government
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1892. Approved March 18,1892. 3pp.

---- No. 17. An act to prevent fraudulent transactions on the part of
commission merchants and other consignees of goods and other property
in the District of Columbia. Approved March 21, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 18. An act to provide for terms of the United States circuit
and district courts at Cumberland, Maryland. Approved March 21, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 19. An act for the relief of the inhabitants of the town of
Chelan, in Okanogan county, State of Washington. Approved March 24,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 20. An act to set apart a tract of land in the State of
California for the use of the Lick Observatory of the astronomical
department of the University of California. Approved March 25, 1892.

---- No. 21. An act to provide for the establishment of a port of
delivery at Council Bluffs, Iowa. Approved March 26, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 22. An act to amend section 1216 of the Revised Statutes,
relative to certificates of merit to the enlisted men of the Army.
Approved March 29, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 23. An act to determine the sessions of the circuit and
district courts of the United States for the eastern district of
Wisconsin. Approved March 31, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 24. An act to change the name of the customs collection
district and port of Wilmington, California, to Los Angeles, and for
other purposes. Approved March 31, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 25. An act to amend an act entitled "An act making
appropriations to provide for the expenses of the government for the
District of Columbia for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1882, and for
other purposes," approved March 3, 1881. Approved March 31, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 26. An act to authorize the appointment of clerk for the
circuit and district courts in the Texarkana division of the eastern
district of Arkansas. Approved April 1, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 27. An act granting to the State of South Dakota section
numbered thirty-six in township numbered ninety-four north of range
numbered fifty-six west, in the county of Yankton, in said State, for
the purpose of an asylum for the insane, to correct an act approved
June 16, 1880, attempting to make such grant to the Territory of
Dakota, and for other purposes. Approved April 1, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 28. An act to prevent fraud upon the water revenues of the
District of Columbia. Approved April 5, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 29. An act to protect foreign exhibitors at the World's
Columbian Exposition from prosecution for exhibiting wares protected by
American patents and trade marks. Approved April 6, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 30. An act changing the time for holding the circuit and
district courts in the district of West Virginia. Approved April 6,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 31. An act establishing a port of delivery at Des Moines,
Iowa. Approved April 7, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 32. An act to amend an act entitled "An act to authorize the
construction of a railroad, wagon, and foot-passenger bridge at
Burlington, Iowa, approved August 6, 1888," as amended by act approved
February 21, 1890. Approved April 7, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 33. An act to change the time of holding the courts in the
eastern judicial district of Texas. Approved April 7, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 34. An act to amend the act concerning officers of the
National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers, and for other purposes.
Approved April 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 35. An act to repeal the provisions of an act entitled "An act
to amend sections 4488 and 4489 of the Revised Statutes, requiring
life-saving appliances on steamers," approved March 2, 1889, so far as
they relate to steamers plying exclusively upon any of the lakes, bays,
or sounds of the United States. Approved April 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 36. An act extending the privileges of the first and seventh
sections of the act approved June 10, 1880, governing the
transportation of merchandise without appraisement, to the port of
Ogdensburg, of N. Y. Approved April 13, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 37. An act to extend to Marquette, Michigan, the privilege of
immediate transportation of unappraised merchandise. Approved April 13,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 38. An act to authorize the construction of a bridge across
the Missouri river, between the city of Chamberlain, in Brulé county,
and Lyman county, South Dakota. Approved April 15, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 39. An act authorizing the Velasco Terminal Railway Company to
construct a bridge across the Brazos river, in the State of Texas.
Approved April 15, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 40. An act making Velasco a sub-port of entry. Approved April
15, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 41. An act to amend an act entitled "An act to authorize the
Oregon & Washington Bridge Company to construct and maintain a bridge
across the Columbia river, between the State of Oregon and the State of
Washington, and to establish it as a post-road." Approved April 18,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 42. An act to change the times for holding the circuit and
district courts of the United States for the western district of
Missouri. Approved April 19, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 43. An act to establish a military post near Little Rock,
Arkansas. Approved April 23, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 44. An act to authorize the appointment of an inspector of
plumbing in the District of Columbia, and for other purposes. Approved
April 23, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 45. An act to extend the time for making an assessment of real
estate in the District of Columbia, outside the cities of Washington
and Georgetown. Approved April 28, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 46. An act to empower the Commissioners of the District of
Columbia to grant respites and pardons in certain cases. Approved April
28, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 47. An act to amend the act giving the approval and sanction
of Congress to the route and termini of the Anacostia & Potomac River
Railroad in the District of Columbia. Approved April 30, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 48. An act to amend the charter of the Rock Creek Railroad
Company. Approved April 30, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 49. An act to create a third division of the district of
Kansas for judicial purposes, and to fix the time for holding court
therein. Approved May 3, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 50. An act to prohibit the coming of Chinese persons into the
United States. Approved May 5, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 51. An act authorizing the Leavenworth & Platte County Bridge
Company to sell, transfer, and assign to the Leavenworth Terminal
Railway and Bridge Company the rights and franchises as granted by acts
of Congress approved February 25, and March 2, 1889, and by act of
Congress approved July 25, 1890. Approved May 9, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 52. An act to provide for the permanent preservation and
custody of the records of the volunteer armies, and for other purposes.
Approved May 9, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 53. An act to encourage American shipbuilding. Approved May
10, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 54. An act making appropriations for expenses that may be
incurred under the treaties between the United States and Great
Britain, concluded at Washington, February 29, and April 18, 1892.
Approved May 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 55. An act to punish false swearing before trial boards of the
Metropolitan police force and fire department of the District of
Columbia, and for other purposes. Approved May 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 56. An act to establish sub-ports of entry and delivery at
Superior, Wisconsin, and at Ashland, Wisconsin, in the Superior
collection district of Michigan and Wisconsin. Approved May 11, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 57. An act to authorize the construction of a bridge across
the Missouri river at De Witt, Carroll county, Missouri, and to
establish it as a post-road. Approved May 12, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 58. An act to authorize the construction of a bridge across
the Osage river, between the town of Warsaw and the mouth of Turkey
creek, in Benton county, Missouri. Approved May 12, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 59. An act to amend an act entitled "An act to incorporate the
National Union Insurance Company, of Washington," approved February 14,
1865. Approved May 11, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 60. An act to establish a military post at or near the city of
Helena, in Lewis and Clarke county, in Montana. Approved May 12, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 61. An act to authorize a national bank at Chicago, Illinois,
to establish a branch office upon the grounds of the World's Columbian
Exposition. Approved May 12, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 62. An act to provide for certain of the most urgent
deficiencies in the appropriations for the service of the Government
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1892, and for other purposes.
Approved May 13, 1892. 4pp.

---- No. 63. An act to authorize the construction of a telephone line
on the coast of Virginia from Cape Charles to Assateague Island, in aid
of the preservation of life and property. Approved May 13, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 64. An act to amend an act entitled "An act relating to tax
sales and taxes in the District of Columbia." Approved May 13, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 65. An act authorizing the construction of a wagon and motor
bridge over the Missouri river at Saint Charles, Missouri. Approved May
23, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 66. An act to provide for a term of the United States circuit
and district courts at Evanston, Wyoming. Approved May 23, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 67. An act to vacate that part of Madison street, Georgetown,
west of Back street, and extend Y street in Burleith, in the District
of Columbia. Approved May 25, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 68. An act for the relief of holders of drawback certificates
issued under an act of Congress approved June 2, 1890. Approved May 25,
1892. 1p.

---- No. 69. An act for the protection of livery-stable keepers and
other persons keeping horses at livery within the District of Columbia.
Approved May 31, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 70. An act making Laredo, Texas, a sub-port of entry. Approved
June 3, 1892. 1p.

----No. 71. An act to amend sections 2807 and 2881 of the Revised
Statutes. Approved June 3, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 72. An act to repeal the license tax of twenty-five dollars
per year now imposed upon produce-dealers in the markets of the
District of Columbia. Approved June 3, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 73. An act to establish West Point, Virginia, a sub-port of
entry and delivery in the collection district of Richmond, Virginia.
Approved June 4, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 74. An act for the regulation of the practice of dentistry in
the District of Columbia and for the protection of the people from
empiricism in relation thereto. Approved June 6, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 75. An act to establish a railway bridge across the Illinois
river, between a point at or near the city of Havana, in Mason county,
and a point on the opposite side of said river, in Fulton county, in
the State of Illinois. Approved June 6, 1892. 3pp.

---- No. 76. An act to enable the Centennial Board of Finance,
incorporated by an act approved June 1, 1872, to close its affairs, and
dissolving said corporation. Approved June 6, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 77. An act granting to the Topeka Water and Electric Power
Company of Kansas the right to erect and maintain a dam or dams across
the Kansas river, within Shawnee county, in the State of Kansas.
Approved June 6, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 78. An act to authorize building a bridge over Tennessee
river. Approved June 6, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 79. An act to authorize the Illinois and Iowa Railway and
Terminal Company to build a bridge across the Mississippi river at
Moline, Illinois. Approved June 8, 1892. 3pp.

---- No. 80. An act donating twenty acres of land from the Fort Sidney
military reservation, on the northeast corner thereof, to the city of
Sidney, Nebraska, for cemetery purposes. Approved June 10, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 81. An act making appropriations to supply deficiencies in the
appropriations for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1892,
and other purposes. Approved June 14, 1892. 1p.

---- No. 82. An act granting the use of certain lands to the city of
New Bedford, Massachusetts, for a public park. Approved June 15, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 83. An act to authorize the Glen Echo Railroad Company to
cross the Washington Aqueduct. Approved June 15, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 84. An act to provide for the disposition and sale of lands
known as the Klamath River Indian Reservation. Approved June 17, 1892.
1p.

---- No. 85. An act granting the right and authority to the Mexican
Gulf, Pacific and Puget Sound Railroad Company, to build one bridge
over each of the following named rivers in the State of Alabama,
namely: The Alabama river, the Warrior river, the Sipsey river, and the
Tennessee river; the said bridges to be used by the Mexican Gulf,
Pacific and Puget Sound Railroad Company in carrying freight and
passengers by rail and otherwise. Approved June 21, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 86. An act to authorize the construction of a bridge across
the Missouri river at the city of Yankton, South Dakota. Approved June
22, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 87. An act authorizing the Continental Bridge Company to
construct a bridge across the Rio Grande river at or near Brownsville,
Texas. Approved June 22, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 88. An act authorizing the Quincy Pontoon Bridge Company to
construct and maintain a pontoon bridge across the Mississippi river at
the city of Quincy, Illinois. Approved June 22, 1892. 2pp.

---- No. 89. An act to include lot numbered fifty-three in block
eighty-nine at Hot Springs, Arkansas, in the public reservation at that
place. Approved June 22, 1892. 1p.


LEECH, EDWARD O. A brief history of coinage legislation in the United
States. Washington, 1891. 20pp.
                                                            .15

    Treasury Dep't, doc. no. 1453.


LEGG, A. C. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Legg _v._
    U.S. February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 94; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LEWIS, JOHN W. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
for the relief of J. W. Lewis. (Compensation.) January 26, 1892. 8pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 108; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- MARY F. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Lewis v.
    U.S. January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 44; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS BUILDING. List of persons employed on, not
specifically appropriated for. April 6, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 119; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LIEN. Report from the committee on the judiciary adversely on bill
providing that judgments rendered in a U.S. court shall not be a lien
on real estate in any other county than the one in which the court is
situate, unless a transcript of the judgment be first filed in said
county. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 170; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LIFE SAVING SERVICE. Report from the committee on commerce favoring
bill to establish a life-saving station at Gay Head, Mass. January 21,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 85; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to amend and re-enact sec. 5 of an act
entitled "An act to promote the efficiency of the life-saving service;"
approved May 4, 1882. January 21, 1892. 10pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 87; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on interstate and foreign commerce
favoring bill to establish a life-saving station at Gay Head, Mass.
February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 188; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LIGHT HOUSES. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill to
establish a beacon light on breakwater at Bridgeport, Conn. January 21,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 81; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to establish a light near Butler Flats, New
Bedford, Mass. January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 82; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to establish additional aids to navigation
in Tampa Bay, Fl. January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 84; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LINE-CARRYING PROJECTILES. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury
relative to line-carrying projectiles and the means of propelling them.
January 25, 1892. 12pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 22; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury transmitting proceedings
of the inspectors of steam vessels at their meeting in September, 1891,
in relation to the use of line-carrying projectiles on vessels. January
18, 1892. 50pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on interstate and foreign commerce to
accompany bill (S. 2056) to repeal the requirement to carry
line-carrying projectiles on lake, bay, and sound steamers. March 9,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 568: 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LITTLE, JOHN, and WILLIAMS, H. Report from the committee on Indian
affairs favoring bill for the relief of Little and Williams. (Damages
under a cancelled mining lease on an Indian reservation.) January 19,
1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 41; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LITTLE ROCK, ARK. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to establish a military fort near Little Rock. January
28, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LOCAL TRANSPORTATION. Consular reports on local transportation in
foreign cities. 142pp.

    U.S. Consular reports no. 139, pp. 597-738.


LOCKWOOD, CHAUNCY M. Report from the committee on post-offices and
post-roads favoring bill for the relief of representatives of C. M.
Lockwood. (Mail contractor.) February 9, 1892. 10pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 195; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LOGAN, JOHN S. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of J. S. Logan. (For money advanced.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 60; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LOOMIS, ELIAS. A memoir of. By H. A. Newton. [With a list of Prof.
Loomis's writings.] From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington,
1891. 32pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 833.


LOOMIS, FRANCIS B. The French market for American products. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 15-18.

---- Pensions for French workingmen. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 206-208.

---- Electricity and the looms of St. Etienne. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 252-253.

---- Accidents to work people. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 259-264.


LOS ANGELES, CALIF. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring the erection of a public building at Los Angeles.
January 12, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 17; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY. Report from the committee on public lands
favoring bill (S. 143) to increase the endowment of the university.
January 11, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 10; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LOWE, VIRGINIA. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Lowe v.
    U.S. February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 64; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LUCUS, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS. Animals recently extinct or threatened with
extermination as represented in the collections of the U.S. Nat.
Museum. From report of the Nat. Mus. 1888-'89, pp. 609-649. Washington,
1891. 43pp., 11 pls.

---- Explorations in Newfoundland and Labrador in 1887, made in
connection with the cruise of the U.S. Fish Commission schooner
_Grampus_. From report of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp. 709-728.
Washington, 1891. 21pp., 1 pl.


LUGGER, OTTO. Migratory locusts in Minnesota in 1891. 7pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 27, pp. 18-24.


LYNCH, DAVID. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Lynch _v._
    U.S. January 28, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 59; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


LYON, JOHN. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to remove the charge of desertion against J. Lyon.
January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 65; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MACE, WILLIAM HARRISON. Organization of historical material.
(Abstract.) 5pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 103-107.


McCASKEY, JAMES F., _Consul._ Acapulco-American trade in 1891. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 590-591.


McCLURE, DANIEL. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of D. McClure. February 4 and 5, 1892. 1+1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 159, and H.R. rep. no. 99; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McCOAL, WELLS C. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of W. C. McCoal. (Correction of his record.)
January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 42; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McDANIEL, ORIN R. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of O. R. McDaniel. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 63: 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McELROY, G. B., _d. d._ Adrian College, Mich. Sketch. 3pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 157-159.


McFARLAND, JAMES A. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill for the relief of J. A. McFarland. February 8, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 195; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McGARRAHAN, WILLIAM. Report from the committee on mines and mining
favoring bill (H.R. 1169) for the relief of Wm. McGarrahan. (Title to
mining lands.) February 9, 1892. 10pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 245; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MACK, W. S. Hand and eye training in the public schools. 5pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, part ii, pp. 983-987.


MACKINAC NATIONAL PARK. Letter from the Secretary of War transmitting a
report on the condition of the Mackinac National Park. January 25,
1892. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McLAUGHLIN, ANDREW C. History of higher education in Michigan.
Washington, 1891. 178pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891.

---- THOMAS A. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of T. A. McLaughlin. (Correction of record.)
January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 60; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


McMAHON, JOHN. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the honorable discharge of Major John McMahon. February 16,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 328; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MAGRUDER, NATHANIEL. Report from the committee on the District of
Columbia favoring bill for the relief of the heirs of N. Magruder.
(Damages to property.) February 1, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 138; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MALLY, F. W. Report of progress in the investigation of the cotton boll
worm. 12pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Div. of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 45-56.


MARBLE, ALBERT P. Sanitary conditions for schoolhouses. Washington,
1891. 121pp., 81 pls.
                                                            .75

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 3,
    1891.

---- Industrial education as a part of the common-school course. 5pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 917-921.


MARINE BOARD. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill to
establish a marine board for the advancement of the interests of the
merchant marine. January 21, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 88; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MARINETTE and WESTERN RAILROAD. Report from the committee on Indian
affairs favoring bill to authorize the M. and W. railroad company to
construct a railroad through the Menomonee reservation, Wis. February
15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 347; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MARITIME CANAL COMPANY OF NICARAGUA. Report. Dec. 10, 1891. 6pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MARSH, C. C. Report upon some of the magnetic observatories of Europe.
4^o. 37pp., 6 pls.

    U.S. Naval Observatory: Observations, 1887; appendix 1.


MARSTON, S. W. Report from the committee on Indian affairs favoring
bill to settle the claims of S. W. Marston. (Services and expenses as
Indian agent.) January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MARTINSBURG, W. VA. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of the Methodist Episcopal Church of Martinsburg. (For
use and occupancy.) January 25, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 97; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MARVIN, C. F., _U.S. A._ Experimental studies on vapor pressure
measurements. 33pp.

    War Dep't, Signal office, annual report 1891, appendix no. 10, pp.
    345-377.

---- On the construction of a normal barometer. 4pp., 3 pls.

    War Dep't, Signal office, annual report 1891, appendix no. 10, pp.
    377-380.

---- Experimental studies on vapor pressure measurements. 8pp.

    War Dep't, Signal office, annual report 1890, appendix no. 18, pp.
    655-662.

---- Experimental studies on wind pressures and wind velocities. 8pp.

    War Dep't, Signal office, annual report 1890, appendix no. 26, pp.
    691-698.


MASON, EDWARD CAMPBELL. Congressional demands upon the Executive for
information. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 71-72.

---- Border land between the historian and the archæologist.
(Abstract.) 1p.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, p. 111.


---- FRANK H., _Consul-General_. Close of the Frankfort electrical
exhibition. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 23-25.

---- Beet sugar in Hesse-Nassau. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 214-215.

---- German plate-glass manufacture. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 222-225.

---- Desulphuration of pig iron by manganese. 6pp., 1 pl.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 246-251.

---- Scientific fertilization of tobacco lands. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 513-519.

---- Over-production of sugar. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 177-179.


---- OTIS TUFTON. Aboriginal skin dressing. A study based on material
in the U.S. Nat. Museum. From report of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp.
553-589. Washington, 1891. 39pp., 33 pls.

---- Progress of anthropology in 1890. From the Smithsonian report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 82pp., 4 pls.
                                                            .20

    Smithsonian pub. no. 826.


MATHEWS, F. A., _Consul-General_. American trade opportunities in
Morocco. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 170-175.


MAYO, A. D. Southern women in the recent educational movement in the
South. Washington, 1892. 300pp.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 1,
    1892.

---- The normal school in the United States. 3pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 575-577.


MELDOLA, RAPHAEL. The photographic image. From the Smithsonian report
for 1890. Washington, 1891. 14pp.
                                                            .02

    Smithsonian pub. no. 816.


MELVILLE, WILLIAM HARLOW. Metacinnabarite from New Almaden, California.
4pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 80-83.

---- Analyses of rocks from California. Series from Mount Diablo. 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 124.


MERCHANT MARINE. Report of the board to consider the recommendations of
the U.S. delegates to the International Marine Conference regarding
matters pertaining to the merchant marine. January 20, 1892. 43pp., 3
pls.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MERCHANT VESSELS. Twenty-third annual list of merchant vessels of the
    U.S., with the official numbers and signal letters awarded them by the
commissioner of navigation, etc., for the year ended June 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. lviii, 1-439pp., 1 pl.
                                                           2.50

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1444.

---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution (S. r.
75) to print 2,000 extra copies of the 23d annual list of merchant
vessels. May 5, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 623; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MERRILL, GEORGE PERKINS. Preliminary handbook of the department of
geology of the U.S. Nat. Museum. From report of the Nat. Mus.,
1888-'89. Appendix, pp. 1-50. Washington, 1891. 52pp.


---- SAMUEL, _Consul-General_. Sheep and wool in British India. 12pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 37-48.


---- SELAH, _Consul_. Jews and Jewish colonies in Palestine. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 26-31.

---- Palestine in 1891. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 337-343.


MERRIMAN, MANSFIELD. On the determination by least squares of the
relation between two variables. _See_ Kummell, C. H.


METCALF, HORACE, _Consul_. The world's ship-building. 40pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 281-320.


MEXICAN CLAIMS COMMISSION. Report of the Secretary of State regarding
certain claims provided for by a convention between the U.S. and Mexico
in 1868. January 19, 1892. 10pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 20; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


MEYER, VICTOR. The chemical problems of to-day. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 17pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 815.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., APRIL, 1892.    No. 4.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.

CATALOGUE.

APRIL, 1892.


MIDDLEKAUFF, JOHN C. Findings of the court of claims in the case of
Middlekauff _v._ U.S. January 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 37; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

MILITARY AFFAIRS. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to establish a military post on the line of railway
between Burlington and Highgate, Vt. February 12, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 297; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

MILITARY RECORDS. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to provide for the collection, custody, and arrangement
of the records of the Revolution, etc. February 1, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 143; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

MILITIA. An abstract of the militia force of the United States for
1891. 7pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (H.R.
7318) to promote the efficiency of the militia. March 17, 1892. 33pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 754; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

MILLER, DAVID. Findings of the court of claims in the case of D. Miller
v. U.S. February 10, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 76; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- HOWARD. Preliminary report on the possibilities of the reclamation
of the arid regions of Kansas and Colorado by utilizing the underlying
waters. 6pp., map.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry 1892, pt. 1, pp. 301-367.


MINERS. Petition from coal miners in Indian territory for an inspector
under act of 1891 for the protection of the lives of miners. February
17, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 132; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of appropriation for carrying into effect the act of 1891
for the protection of the lives of miners. March 21, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 169; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MINING DÉBRIS. Memorial of miners and farmers at San Francisco praying
such legislation as will protect navigable waters from mining débris.
February 23, 1892. 6pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 79; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MINOT, CHARLES-SEDGWICK. Morphology of the blood corpuscles. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 6pp., 1 pl.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 819.


MISSIMER, H. C. Facts _versus_ theories. Shown by the records kept for
twenty-two years by the principal of a high school, giving the
subsequent occupations pursued by the graduates. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 597-602.


MISSISSIPPI RIVER. Report from the committee on interstate and foreign
commerce favoring bill to amend "An act for the construction of a
railroad bridge across the Mississippi at South St. Paul, Minne."
January 27, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 8; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MOBILE AND GIRARD RAILROAD CO. Letter from the Secretary of the
Interior relative to lands claimed by the M. & G. R.R. Co. March 7,
1892. 5pp.

    Sen. ex. doc no. 52; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MONEY-LENDING. Senator Peffer's resolution asking an investigation of
the expenses attending the business of money-lending. December 10,
1891. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MONROE CORRESPONDENCE. Message from the President relative to the
proposed purchase of the unpublished correspondence of President
Monroe. March 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 62; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MONTANA. Memorial of the legislature against the Conger lard bill.
December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 6; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the legislature relating to Brig. Gen. John Gibson.
December, 1891.  1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 8; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial for the removal of the mineral restrictions upon school
lands, etc. December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 9; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MONTELIUS, OSCAR. The age of bronze in Egypt. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 19pp., 6 pls., 6 l.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 825.


MONTGOMERY, R. H. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of R. H. Montgomery. (Longevity pay.)
January 20, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MOONEY, JAMES. The sacred formulas of the Cherokees. 97pp., 4 pls.

    Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of Ethnology: 7th annual report,
    pp. 301-397.


MORGAN, DANIEL. Report from the committee on the library favoring bill
to preserve the grave of Daniel Morgan and erect a monument. February
26, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 471; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- EDWIN VERNON. Slavery in New York.--The status of the slave under
the English colonial government. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 87-88.


MORRISON, THOMAS. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill to remove charge of desertion against T. Morrison. January 21,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 71; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MOSES, THOMAS FREEMAN., _m. d._ Urbana University, Ohio. Sketch. 4pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education; Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 226-229.


MOSS, WILLIAM. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of the estate of W. Moss. (Mail contractor.) January 26,
1892. 6pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 110; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MULLAN, A. J. E. Boston college. Sketch. 5pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education; Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 374-378.


MUNICH ART EXPOSITION. Letter from the Secretary of State recommending
an appropriation to enable the U.S. to be properly represented.
February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 60; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MURDOCK, GEORGE H. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill for the relief of G. H. Murdock. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 161; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MURPHY, DENNIS. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of the sureties of Dr. D. Murphy. January 13, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 22; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MURRAY, JOSEPH. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of J. Murray. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 202; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


MURTEFELDT, MARY E. Entomological notes for the season of 1891. 9pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 36-44.


MUSSEY, REUBEN DELAVAN. Bills of rights in state constitutions.
(Abstract.) 3pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 75-77.


MUZEAN, E. Effects of fire on gun carriages. Translated by Lieut. F. P.
Peck. 1891. 4^o. 70pp.
                                                            .75

    Notes on the construction of ordnance, No. 58.


MYERS, LEVI N., _Consul._ Commerce and products of British Columbia.
10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 194-203.


MYERS, P. V. N. Belmont college, College Hill, Ohio. Sketch. 2pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 230-231.


NATIONAL BANKS. Report from the committee on banking and currency to
accompany bill (H.R. 5681) for the better control of and safety of
national banks. February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 233; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on rules favoring resolution to
investigate failures of Keystone, Spring Garden and Maverick national
banks. February 9, 1892.  1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 230; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NATIONAL FARMERS' CONGRESS. Petition. January 5, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 39; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NATIONAL MUSEUM. _See_ United States National Museum.


NAUTICAL ALMANAC. _See_ American Ephemeris.


NAVY DEPARTMENT. Report of the Secretary of the navy, being part of the
message and documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. Washington, 1891.
663pp.
                                                           1.00

---- Alphabetical catalogue of the navy department library. Authors.
Washington, 1891. 601pp.
                                                           2.00

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Navy requesting that the Navy
Department library be designated as a depository for government
publications. March 29, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 179; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés of the Navy Department during 1891. 6pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 92; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on naval affairs to accompany bill (H.R.
7093) making appropriations for the naval service for 1892-'93. March
10, 1892. 26pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 621; 52d Cong., 2d sess.

---- List of employés in the department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified service, and who are not
specifically authorized by law. April 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 70; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Navy relative to bids for
building certain types of war ships on the great lakes. May 6, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 95; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Bureau of Navigation. Annual report of the chief of the Bureau,
1891. Washington, 1891. 63pp.
                                                            .25

---- ---- Hydrographic Office. Annual report of the Hydrographer to the
bureau of navigation for the fiscal year ending January 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 33pp.
                                                            .20

---- ---- ---- _Notices to mariners._ [Weekly.]  Nos. 1-26. January 2
to June 25, 1892.

---- ---- ---- _Hydrographic Bulletin._ [Weekly.] January 7 to June 30,
1892. _Broadsides._

---- ---- ---- Pilot chart of the North Atlantic Ocean. [Monthly.]
January to June, 1892. 6 sheets. each,
                                                            .20

---- Bureau of Ordnance. Report of the chief of the bureau for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 86pp.

---- Bureau of Construction and Repair. Report of the chief of the
bureau for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891.
176pp.

---- Bureau of Yards and Docks. Annual report of the chief of the
bureau of yards and docks. 1891. Washington, 1891. 26pp.

---- Bureau of Equipment. Annual report of the chief of the bureau of
equipment. 1891. Washington, 1891. 28pp.

---- ---- Nautical Almanac Office. Annual report of the superintendent
of the Nautical Almanac. 1891. Washington, 1891. 5pp.

---- ---- Naval Inspector of Electric Lighting. Annual report, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 6pp.

---- ---- Superintendent of Compasses. Annual report, 1891. Washington,
1891. 6pp.

---- Bureau of Steam Engineering. Annual report of the chief of the
bureau for the year 1891. Washington, 1891. 83pp.
                                                            .50

---- Bureau of Provisions and Clothing. Report of the Paymaster-General
of the Navy for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891.
86pp.

---- Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Annual report of the chief of the
bureau for 1891. Washington, 1891. 34pp.

---- Marine Corps. Annual report of the Commandant, 1891. Washington,
1891. 18pp.

---- U.S. Naval Academy. Annual report of the superintendent of the
Naval Academy, 1891. 6pp.

---- ---- Annual report of the visitors to the U.S. Naval Academy,
1891. Washington, 1891. 10pp.

---- War Records Office. Naval war records office memorandum no. 3.
Chronological tables. December 26, 1860. November 6, 1861. Washington,
1891. 31pp.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 4. List of United States naval vessels,
1861-1865, including the Ellet ram fleet and Mississippi marine
brigade, etc. Washington, 1891. 14pp.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 5. List of log books of United States vessels,
1861-1865, on file in the Navy Department. Washington, 1891. 49pp.


NAVY REGISTER. Register of the commissioner and warrant officers of the
navy of the U.S. and of the marine corps to January 1, 1892.
Washington, 1892. 189pp.
                                                            .75


NEBRASKA. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill to
survey and mark the boundary between Nebraska and S. Dakota embraced in
the Pine Ridge and Rosebud reservations. February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 152; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Resolution of state beet sugar convention favoring an
appropriation of $50,000 for school of instruction. February 15, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 74; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEET, JOHN S., JR. Report from the committee on military affairs,
favoring bill for the relief of J. S. Neet, Jr. (For horse.) January
14, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 26; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEGLEY, CHARLES, _Consul._ Commerce of Rio Grande do Sul. 16pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 51-66.


NETTLETON, EDWARD S., _C. E._ Artesian and underflow investigation.
Final report to the Secretary of Agriculture. Washington, 1892. 116pp.,
5 fold. l. 24 plates.

    Agr'l Dep't, Irrigation inquiry, 1892, pt. 2.


NEVADA. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill to reimburse
certain persons for repelling invasions by Indians in Nevada. January
13, 1892. 12pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEWARK, N. J. Report from the committee on interstate and foreign
commerce favoring bill extending the privileges of secs. 1 and 7, act
of June 10, 1880, to the port of Newark. February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 272; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEW, JOHN C., _Consul-general. _ English hops. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 167-170.


NEWBERRY, JOHN STRONG. The paleozoic fishes of North America. 340pp.,
53 pls.
                                                           1.00

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Monograph no. xvi. 1889.


NEWELL, FRANK H.<B> Irrigation in Oregon. 4^o. 26pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 178.

---- Irrigation in Nevada. 4^o. 24pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 163.

---- Artesian wells for irrigation. 27pp. 4^o.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 193.


---- WILLIAM, _Consul._ Wages in Nicaragua. 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, p. 382.


NEW MEXICO. Report of the Governor of New Mexico to the Secretary of
the Interior. 1891. Washington, 1891. 44pp.

---- Report from the committee on territories favoring bill (H.R. 7136)
to enable the people of New Mexico to form a constitution and state
government and to be admitted into the Union. March 16, 1892. 45pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 736; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEW ORLEANS. Memorial asking an appropriation of $500,000 for the
improvement of the harbor of. December 17, 1891. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEWPORT NEWS, VA. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill to erect a public building at Newport News.
January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 91; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NEWSOM, A. J. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Newsom v.
    U.S. February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 105; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- T. M., _Consul._ Malaga and its surroundings. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 257-259.


NICARAGUA CANAL. Resolution of the legislature of California urging
prompt construction of the Nicaragua canal. December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 7; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the Traffic association of California favoring the
prompt construction of the canal. January 11, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 36; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Senator Higgins' resolution in reference to the Nicaragua Canal
company. February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 69; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War transmitting a report by Maj. C.
E. Dutton on the Nicaragua canal. March 18, 1892. 24pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 97; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- See Maritime Canal company.


NOBLE, NOAH. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of heirs of N. Noble. (Balance due him.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 92; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NORTH, S. N. D. Statistics of wool manufacture. 4^o. 12pp.

    U.S. Census 1890: Bulletin no. 169.


NORTHERN PACIFIC RAILROAD. Petition in behalf of settlers between
Wallula, Washington, and Portland, Oregon, whose lands and homes are
claimed by the N.P R.R. Co. January 6, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 33; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the Blalock wheat-growing company for authority to
purchase of the government at $1.25 an acre land purchased by them of
the N.P.R.R. Co. January 27, 1892. 10pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 52; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


NORTON, W. S. Hillsdale college, Hillsdale, Mich. Sketch. 9pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 124-132.


NOTES ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF ORDNANCE. _See_ War department, Ordnance
office.


OAKLAND, CALIF. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring the erection of a public building at Oakland. January
12, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 16; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OATHS. Letter from the Secretary of War with draft of a bill to
authorize the administration of oaths by certain officers. February 16,
1892. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 40; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OFFICIAL REGISTER of the United States, containing a list of the
officers and employés in the civil, military and naval service on the
first of July, 1891, together with a list of vessels belonging to the
U.S. vol 1. Legislative, executive and judicial. Washington, 1892. vi,
1179pp.
                                                           2.00


OGDEN, UTAH. Report from the committee on public buildings and grounds
favoring bill to erect a public building at Ogden. January 18, 1892.
6pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 37; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OGDENSBURG, N. Y. Report from the committee on interstate and foreign
commerce favoring bill extending the privileges of sections 1 and 7,
act of June 10, 1880, to the port of Ogdensburg. February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 235; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OKLAHOMA. Report of the Governor of Oklahoma to the Secretary of the
Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 15pp.


OLIVER, AARON J. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of A. J. Oliver. February 5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 100; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OMAHA, NEB. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill
to construct a military storehouse at Omaha. January 18, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 35; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OSBORN, HERBERT. Report on a trip to Kansas to investigate reported
damages from grasshoppers. 7pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 27, pp. 58-64.

---- Insects of the season in Iowa. 6pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 26, pp. 57-62.


OSGOOD, HERBERT L. The political ideas of the Puritans. (Abstract.)
2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep., 1890, pp. 99-100.


OTIS, GEORGE K. Report from the committee onpost-offices and post-roads
favoring bill for the relief of G. K. Otis. (Loss on contract.) January
25, 1892, 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 102; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


OTTING, B. J. History of Detroit college, Mich. 5pp., 3 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 166-170.


PADDOCK, SARAH SANDS. Industrial and technological training. 7pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 975-981.


PALMER, AULICK, _Consul._ Beet sugar in the Dresden district. 1p.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, p. 456.


PAMMEL, L. H. New fungous diseases of Iowa. 9pp.

    Journal of mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 95-103.


PANKEY, JAMES. Finding of the court of claims in the case of Pankey
_v._ U.S., March 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 108; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


PARISH, MADISON. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill to remove the charge of desertion against M. Parish. January
21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 68; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PARKER, JACOB W. Adverse report from the committee on public lands on
bill for the relief of J. W. Parker. February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 188; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- WILLIAM KITCHIN. Memoir of. (From _Nature._) From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 6pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 834.


PARSONS, EBEN BURT, _d. d._ Williams college. Sketch, 11pp. 3 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 225-235.


PATENTS. Report from the committee on patents favoring bill (S. 131) to
refer to the court of claims the claim of W. E. Woodbridge for the use
of projectiles. February 11, 1892. 11pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 223; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on patents favoring bill (S. 133) for
the relief of Sarah E. Holroyd for use of hook and eye tackleblocks.
February 11, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 224; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PATTON, S. K. N. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of S. K. N. Patton. February 6, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 180; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PAYNE, JOHN HOWARD. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of the heirs of John Howard Payne. (Balance due him for
consular services.) February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 355; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PEACE CONGRESS. Letter from the Secretary of State relating to a peace
conference of governments in Chicago in connection with the Columbian
exposition. May 25, 1892. 11pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 163; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PEALE, ALBERT CHARLES, and CHATARD, S. M. Analysis of eruptive rock
from Montana, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 123.


PEASE, HENRY, _Consul._ Orchilla in Cape Verde. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 5-6.


PENDERGRASS, MOSES. Report from the committee on post-offices and
post-roads favoring bill for the relief of M. Pendergrass. (Mail
contractor.) January 26, 1892. 11pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 112; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PENSACOLA, FL. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring the erection of a public building at Pensacola.
January 13, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 20; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PENSIONS. Report from the committee on invalid pensions favoring bill
to pension Obe Sutherland. January 13, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 19; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Eliza K. Starr. January 28, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 135; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to increase the pension of J. H. Osgood.
February 2, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 145; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension John Chamberlin. February 2,
1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 146; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring granting a pension to Sarah L. Henderson.
February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 40; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring granting a pension to Esther Doolittle. February
4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 41; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Adelia S. Ferris. February 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 98; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring granting a pension to Margaret Turner. February
5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 56; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring granting a pension to Jane Shierry. February 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 57; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Kate P. Mitchell. February 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 64; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Bridget Maloy. February 5, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 66; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension James McCammon. February 5, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 73; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Jane Allen. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 101; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Jennie Vaughn. February 6, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 183; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Caroline E. Quigg. February 6,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 184; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Levenia D. Athon. February 9,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 183; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Bertha Test. February 9, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 184; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to increase the pension of T. M. Chile.
February 9, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 185; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring an increase of pension to A. B. Carlton. February
9, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 186; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to increase the pension to S. D. Smith.
February 9, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 189; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension R. W. Nason. February 9, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 190; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Martha N. Brainerd. February 9,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 191; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension the widow of Gen. C. S. Hamilton.
February 9, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 192; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Marrilla Parsons. February 9,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 193; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Michael O'Brien. February 9,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 194; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for increase of pension to G. R. Allen.
February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 247; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on pensions favoring bill (S. 349) to
increase the rate of pensions for certain cases of deafness. February
10, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 201; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1910) to amend act of March 4, 1890,
relating to total helplessness, etc. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 202; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 2137) to remove disability of those who
having participated in the rebellion have since enlisted in the navy
and become disabled. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 203; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 1907) to amend sec. 3 of act of June 27,
1890. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 209; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on invalid pensions favoring bill to
increase the pension to Jane A. Ward. February 12, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 298; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Margaret Christian. February 12,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 301; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Elizabeth Crawford. February 15,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 336; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Noah Staley. February 15, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 337; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension A. J. Jones. February 15, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 338; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension J. A. Davis. February 15, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 339; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Lucy Haskell. February 19, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 415; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Mrs. E. Fays. February 19, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 420; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pay accrued pension of E. S. Smith to his
mother. February 19, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 421; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension D. L. Truex. February 19, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 416; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Mary J. Telford. February 24,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 428; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension W. S. Woodward. February 29,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 485; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Betsey Worthington. February 29,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 486; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Jonathan Ramey. February 29,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 488; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension H. H. McElvey. February 29, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 489; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Eliza M. Boatright. February 29,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 490; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Mary Gatlin. February 29, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 491; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension D.C. Barrow. February 29, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 492; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to increase the pension of A. V. Hamilton.
February 29, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 493; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pension Frederick Meredith. February 29,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 494; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on pensions favoring bill (H.R. 5951) to
amend sec. 3 of the pension act of June 27, 1890, relating to widows
and children of soldiers. March 1, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 500; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on invalid pensions favoring bill (H.R.
5686) to establish an intermediate rate of pension between $30 and $72
per month. March 3, and May 3, 1892. 2+1p.

    H.R. rep. nos. 515 and 1264; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 6875) making appropriations for the payments of pensions for
1892-'93. March 4, and June 13, 1892. 17+17pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 525 and Sen. rep. no. 799; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on invalid pensions favoring bill (H.R.
2713) in relation to the execution of declarations and other papers in
pension claims. March 7, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 559; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 5757) concerning the burden of proof
of soundness, and forbidding discriminations against evidence of
witnesses on account of want of official rank. March 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 627; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ To accompany bill (S. 1907) relating to the widow or minor
children of deceased soldiers. May 3, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1260; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Adversely on bill (S. 349) to increase the rate of pension
for certain cases of deafness. May 3, 1890. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1263; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (S. 2137) to amend an act amending the
pension laws of March 3, 1877, extending to those who enlisted in the
navy the same privileges as to those who enlisted in the army. May 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no 1292; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 9118) to supply a deficiency in appropriations for pensions for
1891-'92. June 4, 1892. 13pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1580; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PETERS, J. L. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Peters
_v._ U.S. February 17, 1892. 4p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 95; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PETERSON, JAMES J., _Consul._ Mining companies in Honduras. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 31-32.


PFOATNER, MICHAEL. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill to grant an honorable discharge to M. Pfoatner. January
21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no 67; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PHILADELPHIA, PENN. Report from the committee on commerce favoring
resolution for the improvement to the harbor at Philadelphia, Penn.
January 26, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 107; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PIDGIN, CHARLES F., and SMITH, HUGH M. Fisheries of the Pacific states.
4^o. 25pp.

    U.S. Census 1890: Bulletin no. 167.


---- and FESLER, BERT. Fisheries of the great lakes. 63pp., 4^o.

    U.S. Census 1890: Bulletin no. 173.


PIERCE, NEWTON B. A disease of almond trees. 13pp., 4 pls.

    Journal of Mycology, vol. vii, no. 2, pp. 66-77.


PILLING, JAMES CONSTANTINE. Bibliography of the Algonquin languages.
Washington, 1891. x+614pp., 82 facsimiles.
                                                           1.50

    Smithsonian Institution: Bureau of Ethnology.


PILOTAGE. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill (S. 1282)
to exempt American coastwise sailing vessels from the obligation to pay
state pilots. March 17, 1892. 52pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 395; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PLAYFAIR, _Sir_ R. L. The Mediterranean, physical and historical. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 20pp.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 809.


PLUMACHER, E. H., _Consul_. Steamship and railway traffic in Venezuela.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 176-177.


POND, ADELINE VALENTINE. Influence of the study of drawing in the
development of character. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1264-1270.

---- In Paris galleries. 3pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1280-1282.


PORT HUDSON. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill providing medals to the survivors of the forlorn-hope storming
party of Port Hudson. January 28, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 129; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PORT TOWNSEND, WASHINGTON. Memorial of the chamber of commerce asking
that the fishery laws in operation on the North Atlantic be extended to
the North Pacific. March 8, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 91; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


POST-OFFICE DEPARTMENT. Annual report of the Postmaster-General for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 183pp., 10 pls., 1
map.
                                                            .75

---- Report of the Postmaster-General; being part of the message and
documents, 52d Congress, 1st session. Washington, 1891. 1243pp., 3
fold. l., 1 map, 10 plates.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, pt. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of appropriation for ocean mail service now under
contract for 1892-'93. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 219; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Postmaster-General giving information relative to
ocean mail service between foreign ports. Washington, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 159; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter of the chief of salary and allowance division relative to
third-class Presidential post-offices. March 10, 1892. 14pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 93; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimates of deficiencies on account of the postal service. April
12, 1892. 77pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 192; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés in the department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified civil service, and who are
not specifically authorized by law. April 13, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 77; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on post-office and post-roads, etc., to
accompany bill (H.R. 8224) making appropriations for the service of the
P. O. department for 1892-'93. April 16 and June 22, 1892. 63+3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1135 and Sen. rep. no. 826; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Additional arguments by the Postmaster-general in favor of the
establishment of postal savings depositories. April 20, 1892. 71pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of deficiencies on account of the postal service. April
29, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 216; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Postmaster-general submitting observations upon
bill making appropriations for the service of the department for
1892-'93. May 11, 1892. 17pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 226; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Postmaster-general transmitting a statement
showing buildings rented for the department in the District of
Columbia. May 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 227; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Ass't Attorney-General for P. O. Dep't. Annual report for 1891.
Washington, 1891. 36pp.
                                                            .20

---- Chief Inspector. Report of the Post-office inspector for 1891.
Washington, 1891. 33pp., 3 fold. l.
                                                            .25

---- First Ass't Postmaster-General. Report for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 65pp.
                                                            .25

---- Second Ass't Postmaster-General. Report for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 241pp.
                                                            .50

---- Third Ass't Postmaster-General. Report for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 84pp.
                                                            .25

---- Money Order System. Report of the superintendent for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 48pp.
                                                            .20

---- ---- Estimate of an appropriation for an increase of force in the
office of superintendent of the money-order system. April 25, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 213; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Foreign Mails. Report of the superintendent for 1891. Washington,
1891. 52pp.
                                                            .25

---- Railway Mail Service. Report of the general superintendent for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 348pp.
                                                            .75

---- ---- Daily bulletin of orders affecting the postal service.
January to July, 1892. Folio.

---- Topographer. Report of the topographer, 1891. 9pp.
                                                            .10

---- Dead Letter Office. Report of the superintendent for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 24pp.
                                                            .20

---- Auditor. Annual report of the [6th] auditor of the Treasury for
the Post-Office Department for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 130pp.
                                                            .35


POSTAL SAVINGS BANK. An additional argument by the Postmaster-General
in favor of the establishment of postal savings depositories, with
appendices. April 20, 1892. 71pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


POSTMASTERS. Letters from the Postmaster-General concerning the
conference of postmasters at Washington in 1892. April 15, 1892. 29pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 196; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


POTTS, HOWARD D. Report from the committee on naval affairs favoring
bill for the relief of H. D. Potts. (Increase of pay on the retired
list.) January 20, 1892. 9pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 54; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


POWELL, JOHN WESLEY. Indian linguistic families of America, north of
Mexico. 142pp., 1 map.

    Smithsonian Institution: Bureau of Ethnology, 7th annual report,
    pp. 1-142.


PRESIDENT. Message of the President of the United States communicated
to the two houses of congress at the beginning of the first session of
the 52d congress. Washington, 1891. 39pp.

---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution to print
20,000 extra copies of the annual message. February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 308; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION. Report from the committee on the judiciary
favoring bill (H.R. 3927) to amend the act of 1886. February 5, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 160; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PRESTON, ERASMUS DARWIN. Geodesy. Determination of gravity and on the
magnetic elements in connection with the U.S. Expedition to the west
coast of Africa, 1889-1890. Appendix no. 12, Report of the U.S. Coast
and Geodetic Survey for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 64pp., 11 pls.
                                                            .75


PRISON CONGRESS--(4th). _See_ Randall, C. D.


PUBLIC DOCUMENTS. Letter from the Secretary of the Interior
transmitting the report regarding the receipt, distribution and sale of
public documents on behalf of the government by the Department of the
Interior, 1890-'91. 138pp.
                                                            .50

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 74; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on labor favoring resolution to
distribute public documents to land-grant colleges. January 21, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 77; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of congressional documents from the 15th to the 51st
congress, and of Government publications containing debates and
proceedings of congress, together with miscellaneous lists of public
documents, etc. By J. G. Ames. Washington, 1892. 120pp.
                                                            .50


PUBLIC LANDS. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
(H.R. 6656) relating to the disposal of timber and stone lands, &c.
February 29, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 482; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 5997) to amend sec. 2 of act approved
May 14, 1890, "for the relief of settlers on public lands." February
29, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 483; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PUBLIC PRINTING. Mr. Manderson's report from the committee on printing
to accompany Senate bill 1549 providing for the public printing and
binding and the distribution of public documents. [With testimony.]
January 13, 1892. 483pp.
                                                            .50

    Sen. rep. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on printing to accompany bill (S. 1549)
providing for the public printing and binding and the distribution of
public documents. April 15, 1892. 21pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1092: 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PUBLIC PRINTER. Annual report for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 103pp.
                                                            .50

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 30; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the public printer, submitting estimates of
deficiencies for public printing. February 19, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 137; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the public printer with a list of employés not
specifically authorized by law. April 6, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 118; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PUGET SOUND. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill to
amend "An act to reorganize and establish the customs collection
district of Puget Sound," approved Aug. 28, 1890. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 83; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


PULLMAN, WILLIAM. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill to remove charge of desertion against W. Pullman. January 21,
1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 74; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


QUINN, WILLIAM H. Report from the committee on claims favoring bills
for the relief of W. H. Quinn. (Compensation.) February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 370; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RADAU, R. Photography in the service of astronomy. From the Smithsonian
report for 1889. Washington, 1890. 22pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 790.


RAINY LAKE RIVER, MINN. Report of special agent R. W. De Lambert
relative to the establishment of a permanent government port at Rainy
Lake River. March 14, 1892. 13pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 94; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RAMSEY, F. Y. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of heirs of Joseph Ramsey. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 90; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RAND, BENJAMIN. New England settlements in Acadia. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 41-42.


RANDALL, C. D. The fourth international prison congress, St.
Petersburg, Russia. Washington, 1891. 253pp., 15 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 2,
    1891.


RANDOLPH, FANNY B., and STARK, D. L. Report from the committee on
claims favoring bill for the relief of Randolph and Stark. (For stores
and supplies.) February 3, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 153; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RAWICZ, JOSEPH, _Consul._ Trade and industries of Poland. 21pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 343-363.


READ, HENRY A. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of H. A. Read. (Amend record.) Feb. 26, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 453; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- JOHN B. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of J. B. Read. (For use of patent projectile.) February 16,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 372; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RED CROSS CONFERENCE. Estimate of an appropriation for the expenses of
two delegates to represent the U.S. at the 5th international conference
at Rome in 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 176; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


REGAN, JAMES. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of Lieut. Regan. (Adjustment of his accounts.)
January 19, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 44; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


REID, ALEXANDER J., _Consul._ Brewing in Ireland. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 113-119.


REULEAUX, F. Technology and civilization. From the Smithsonian report
for 1890. Washington, 1891. 18pp.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 831.


REVENUE MARINE SERVICE. Report from the committee on commerce favoring
bill to provide two revenue cutters for service on the Pacific coast.
January 7, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill for the
construction of two revenue cutters for service on the great lakes.
January 28, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 128; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on interstate and foreign commerce
favoring bill to provide a revenue cutter for the harbor of San
Francisco. February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 384; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the
proposed transfer of the revenue marine service. February 19, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 44; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Navy submitting his views as to
the advisability of the transfer of the revenue cutter service from the
Treasury to the Navy department. March 1, 1892. 8pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 86; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RHOADES, HENRY E. Report from the committee on naval affairs favoring
bill for the relief of H. E. Rhoades. January 20, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 53; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RICHARDSON, JOHN B., Consul. The lower Rio Grande in 1891. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 38-44.


RIGGS, STEPHEN RETURN. A Dakota-English dictionary. Edited by J. O.
Dorsey. Washington, 1890. x, 1-665pp.
                                                           3.00

    U.S. Geog. and geol. survey of the Rocky Mountain regions:
Contributions to ethnology, v. 7.


RILEY, CHARLES VALENTINE. The larger digger-wasp. 5pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 248-252.


RISING, W. B. Report on analysis of fermented liquors. 1p.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, p. 14.


RISUM, OTTO A. Report from the committee on post-offices and post-roads
favoring bill for the relief of O. A. Risum, postmaster, for loss of
money package. January 27, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 127; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RIVERS AND HARBORS. Report from the committee on rivers and harbors to
accompany bill (H.R. 7820) making appropriations for public works on
rivers and harbors. April 9, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 967; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the committee on commerce (U.S. Senate) on the bill
(H.R. 7820) making appropriations for the construction, repair, and
preservation of certain public works on rivers and harbors for the year
ending June 30, 1893. Washington, 1892. 422pp.
                                                           1.00

    Sen. rep. no. 666; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ROBINSON, JEHU. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Jehu
Robinson _v._ U.S. March 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 135; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- TRACY, _Consul._ The banana food company. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 455-456.


ROCKEFELLOW, B. F. Report from the committee on post-offices and
post-roads favoring bill for the relief of B. F. Rockefellow,
postmaster, for clerk hire. January 27, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 124; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ROMANES, GEORGE J. Weismann's theory of heredity. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 16pp.
                                                            .10


    Smithsonian pub. no. 820.


ROOSEVELT, GEORGE W., _Consul._ Plate-glass manufacture in Belgium.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 205-206.


ROPES PASS. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill for the
construction of jetties, piers, and breakwaters at private expense in
the Gulf of Mexico at the mouth of Ropes Pass, Texas. January 28, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 131; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ROSE, J. N. Two weeds new to the United States. 4pp., 2 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 355-358.


ROSS, MARY L. Report from the committee on post-offices and post-roads
favoring bill for the relief of Mary L. Ross, post-mistress, for
disbursements. January 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. --; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ROWELL, CHESTER H. _See_ Contested Elections, 51st Congress.


ROWENA. Report from the committee on claims favoring reference to court
of claims the case of the scow _Rowena_, lost by reason of a false
light. February 16, 1892. 12pp., 1 pl.

    H.R. rep. no. 381; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RUBLES, WILLIAM A., _Consul._ Bohemian industrial exhibition. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 157-160.

---- Hop growing in Bohemia. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 500-503.


RUSSELL, THOMAS, _U.S. A._ Report of professor in charge of the river
and flood division, 1891. 194pp., 1 map.

    War Dep't, Signal Office: Annual report 1891, appendix no. 5.

---- Practical rules for prediction of flood stages of rivers in the
United States. _See_ War Dep't, Signal Office: Annual report 1891,
appendix no. 5, p. 73, &c.

---- Instructions for voluntary observers. Prepared under the direction
of the chief of the weather bureau. Washington, 1892. 100pp.
                                                            .35

    Agr'l Dep't, Weather bureau.


RUSSIAN FAMINE. Message from the President of the United States
recommending that a vessel be chartered to transport supplies to
Russia. January 5, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 12; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


RYDER, HENRY B., _Consul._ Danish-English subsidized steam
communication. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 89-91.

---- Fruit and vegetable canning in Denmark. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 120-121.


ST. MARY'S FALLS CANAL. Report of the commerce passing through the
canal during the season of 1891. 4pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SALICIS, GUSTAVE ADOLPHE. Manual training in France. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and Industry, pt. 2, pp. 1123-1128.


SALMON, DANIEL ELMER. Results of experiments with inoculation for the
prevention of hog cholera. 40pp.

    Agr'l Dep't: Farmers' Bulletin no. 8.


SALT. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury containing certain
information relative to the importation of salt. March 2, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 148; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SAMPSON, A. J. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs on
bill for the relief of A. J. Sampson. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 160; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _M. D., Consul._ New Brunswick-American trade. 8pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 545-552.


SAN DIEGO, CALIF. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring the erection of a public building at San Diego, Jan.
12, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 15; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SANDUSKY, OHIO. Report from the committee on ways and means on bill to
extend transportation of dutiable merchandise without appraisement to
the port of Sandusky. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 173; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SANTO DOMINGO. Statement of imports and exports to and from the United
States to Santo Domingo and Puerto Rico, from 1882-1891. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 106; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SARATOGA, N. Y. Report from the committee on the library favoring bill
appropriating $18,484 for the completion of the monument commemorating
the surrender of Burgoyne at Saratoga. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 108; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SAUNDERS, WILLIAM. Papers on horticultural and kindred subjects.
Reprinted from reports of the Department of Agriculture, 1863-1889.
Washington, 1891. 124pp.
                                                            .50


SAWTELLE, CHARLES G. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of Col. Sawtelle. (Adjustment of
accounts.) January 20, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 52; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SAYCE, A. H. The primitive home of the Aryans. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 15pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 823.


SCAIFE, WALTER B. Geographical latitude. From the Smithsonian report
for 1889. Washington, 1891. 47pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian mis. pub. no. 784.


SCHILLINGER PATENTS. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of the owners of the Schillinger pavement patents.
February 4, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 24; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SCHNEIDER, EDWARD ADOLPH. Analysis of ores from Kettle island, Ky. From
Tennessee, Claiborne county. From Kentucky, Bell county. 2pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 127-128.

---- and CHATARD, T. M. Analysis of Websterite from North Carolina and
Maryland, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 122.

---- and EAKINS, L. G. Analysis of ores of manganese from Virginia, 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 127.


SCHODDE, GEORGE H. Capital university, Columbus, Ohio. Sketch. 5pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 195-199.


SCHOTT, CHARLES ANTHONY. Terrestrial magnetism. Results of magnetic
observations recorded at Los Angeles, California, 1882-1889. Part 1.
Absolute measures. Part 2. Differential measures. Observations by M.
Baker, C. Terry Jr., and R. E. Halter. Appendix nos. 8 and 9, Report of
the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey for 1890. Washington, 1891.
45+215pp., 9 pls.
                                                           1.50




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY, 1892.    No. 5.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.

CATALOGUE.

MAY, 1892.


SCHOULER, JAMES. Webster's seventh of March, (1850) speech. (Abstract.)
2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 111-112.


SCHUBERT, HERMANN. The squaring of the circle. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 26pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 803.


SCHWEINITZ, E. A. VON. Investigation of the effects of bacterial
products in the prevention of diseases. 5pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual Report 1891, pp. 138-142.


SCOTT, CHARLES, _d. d._ Hope college, Holland, Mich. Sketch. 4pp., 1
pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 160-163.


SCOVEL, SYLVESTER F. The university of Wooster, Ohio. Sketch. 10pp.

    Int. Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 147-156.


SCUDDER, SAMUEL HUBBARD. Index to the known fossil insects of the world
including myriapods and arachnids. Washington, 1891. 744pp.
                                                            .65

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 71.


SEABIRD. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill to provide
an American register for the barge _Seabird_. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 154; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SEAL, WILLIAM P. Observations on the aquaria of the U.S. Fish
Commission at central station, Washington, D.C. [Extracted from the
Bulletin of the U.S. Fish Commission for 1890, pp. 1-12.] Washington,
1892. 14pp., 4 pls.


SEAMEN. Report from the committee on commerce favoring bill (S. 1222)
for the protection of wages of seamen. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 89; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SEARS, REBECCA. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Sears v.
    U.S. February 23, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 102; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SELLMER, CHARLES. Petition for his retirement as a captain. December
16, 1891. 8pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 7; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SELMA AND MERIDIAN RAILROAD. Report from the committee on claims
favoring bill for the relief of the S. and M. railroad company.
February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 23; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SENATE. Annual report of the secretary of the Senate. December 7, 1891.
4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report of the sergeant-at-arms. December 8, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Annual report of the Secretary of the Senate for the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 142pp.
                                                            .50

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 13; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Senator Aldrich's proposed amendment to the rules. December 10,
1891. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 17; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the architect of the capitol relating to ventilation,
&c., of the Senate wing. January 17, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 42; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on privileges and elections in the
matter of the validity of the appointment of Hon. Horace Chilton to a
seat in the Senate from Texas. January 25, 1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 105; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on privileges and elections in the
matter of Walkinson Call and R. H. M. Davidson claiming title to a seat
in the Senate from Florida. January 25, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 106, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on printing to accompany resolution to
print 1,500 copies of the revised Senate manual. February 2, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 149; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on privileges and elections in the
matter of W. H. Clagett and Fred. T. Dubois, claiming title to a seat
in the Senate from Idaho. February 2 and 16, 1892. [And views of the
minority.] 49+67pp.
                                                            .50

    Sen. rep. no. 148, pts. 1 and 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SENATORS. Report from the select committee on the election of President
and Vice-President to accompany resolutions providing for the election
of senators by the people. [With views of the minority.] February 16
and June 8, 1892. 12pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 368, pts. 1 and 2, and Sen. rep. no. 794; 52d Cong., 1st
sess.


SEQUOIA NATIONAL PARK. Report of the acting superintendent to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 10pp., map.


SETZER, HENRY. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of H. Setzer. (Refund of tax.) February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 373; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SEWALL, J. A. Grass and forage experiment station at Garden City,
Kansas. Operations for 1891, the 3d year. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual report 1891, pp. 342-344.


SHACKLETT, H. W. Findings of the court of claims in the case of
Shacklett _v._ U.S. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 70; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SHAFFER, C. M. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of C. M. Shaffer. (For occupancy.) January 25, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 94; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SHALER, NATHANIEL SOUTHGATE. General account of the fresh-water
morasses of the United States, with a description of the Dismal swamp
district of Virginia and North Carolina. 85pp., 14 pls.

    U.S. Geol. Survey, Tenth annual report, 1888-'89, pp. 255-339.


SHAW, EDMUND, _Consul._ Paraguay. Situation, resources, products,
government, people, commerce, etc. 28pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 556-584.


SHEEHY, MICHAEL. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of M. Sheehy. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 207; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SHEPARD, CHARLES H., _Consul_. New harbor at Malmo. 8pp. 1 pl.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 374-381.


SHIP-CANAL. Report from the committee on railways and canals to
accompany bill (H.R. 283) for ascertaining the feasibility and probable
cost of constructing a ship canal from the great lakes to the navigable
waters of the Hudson river. April 8, 1892. 49pp.
                                                            .25

    H.R. rep. no. 1023; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SHIPLEY, E. R. Report from the committee onpost-offices and post-roads
favoring bill for the relief of E. R. Shipley, post-master, for moneys
lost. January 26, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 113; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- H. W. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of E. R. Shipley. February 4, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the relief
of H. W. Shipley. (Loss on contract.) January 21, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 80; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SHOEMAKER, DAVID. Findings of the court of claims in the case of D.
Shoemaker _v._ U.S. March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 125; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SIBLEY, HENRY H. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of heirs of Henry H. and C. K. Sibley. February 4, 1892.
5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SILL, J. M. B. The Michigan state normal school, Ypsilanti, Michigan.
Sketch. 7pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 98-104.


SILVER COINAGE. Message from the President of the United States
relative to a proposed international conference on the subject of
silver coinage. April 26, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 88; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


---- _See_, also, Coinage.


SKRAINKA CONSTRUCTION COMPANY. Report from the committee on claims
favoring bill for the relief of. February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 58; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SLUMS. Report from the committee on labor favoring House resolution 104
relative to the investigation of slums of cities. March 10, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 625; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SMITH, CHARLES B. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of the heirs of C. B. Smith. (Adjustment
of his accounts.) January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 43; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- ERWIN F. Field notes [on fungous diseases, etc.]. 8pp.

    Journal of Mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp 88-95.

---- Additional evidence on the communicability of peach yellows and
peach rosette. Washington, 1891. 65pp., 39 pls.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of vegetable pathology: Bulletin no. 1.


---- G. W. Findings of the court of claims in the case of G. W. Smith
v. U.S. March 12, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 122; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SMITH, JAMES H. The phylloxera in Germany. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 279-280.

---- Beet sugar in Hesse. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 454-455.

---- The German vintage for 1891. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 592-595.

---- Trade situation in Germany. 9pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 7-15.

---- Incomes in Prussia. 7pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 180, pp. 134-140.

---- Cellulose for bottle shells. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 191-192.


---- NICHOLAS, _Consul._ Commerce of Three Rivers in 1891. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 161-163.

---- Trade and industries of Three Rivers. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 364-367.


---- THEOBALD. Investigation of infectious diseases of domesticated
animals. 22pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual report 1891, pp. 117-138.


---- THOMAS J. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of T. J. Smith. (For expenses as pension examiner.) February
5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 118; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- WALTER. Industrial education, and drawing as its basis. 7pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 955-961.


---- WILLIAM, and o'rs. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of W. Smith and o'rs. (For allowances.)
February 16, 1892. 10pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 352; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SMITHERS, E. J., _Consul._ Japanese floor matting. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 230-231.


SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. Annual report of the board of regents of the
Smithsonian Institution, showing the operations and expenditures, and
condition of the institution to July, 1890. Washington, 1891. xli,
1-808pp.
                                                            .50

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 129, pt. 1; 51st Cong., 2d sess.

---- Report from the committee on the Library to accompany joint
resolution (S. res. 18) to fill vacancies in the Board of Regents.
January 20, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of subordinates employed under the Smithsonian Institution.
March 1, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 116; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Smithsonian publications. No. 784. Geographical latitude. By
Walter B. Scaife. From the Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington,
1891. 47pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 785. Bibliography of the chemical influence of light.
By Alfred Tuckerman. Washington. 1891. iii, 1-22pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 786. Report upon the condition and progress of the
    U.S. National Museum during the year ending June 30, 1889. By G. Brown
Goode. From the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891.
277pp., 4 pls.
                                                            .75

---- _Same._ No. 787. Lists of institutions and foreign and domestic
libraries to which it is desired to send future publications of the
Nat. Museum. From the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington,
1891. 88pp.

---- _Same._ No. 788. Memoir of Heinrich Leberecht Fleischer. By A.
Müller. From the Smithsonian Report for 1889. Washington, 1892. 21pp.

---- _Same._ No. 789. On aerial locomotion. By F. H. Wenham. From
Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington, 1890. 21pp.

---- _Same._ No. 790. Photographs in the service of astronomy. By R.
Radau. From the Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington, 1890. 22pp.

---- _Same._ No. 791. A memoir of Gustav Robert Kirchoff. By Robert von
Helmholtz. From the Smithsonian report for 1889. Washington, 1890.
16pp.

---- _Same._ No. 792. The museums of the future. By G. Brown Goode.
From the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891. 21pp.

---- _Same._ No. 793. Te Pito te Henua, or Easter island. By W. J.
Thomson. From the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. 108pp., 49 pls.

---- _Same._ No. 794. Aboriginal skin dressing. By O. T. Mason. From
report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891. 39pp., 33 pls.

---- _Same._ No. 795. The puma or American lion. By F. W. True. From
the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891. 19pp., 1 pl.

---- _Same._ No. 796. Animals recently extinct or threatened with
extermination, as represented in the collections of the U.S. Nat.
Museum. By F. A. Lucas. From the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89.
Washington, 1891. 43pp., 11 pls.

---- _Same._ No. 797. The development of the American rail and track,
as illustrated by the collection in the U.S. Nat. Museum. By J. E.
Watkins. From report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891.
60pp.
                                                            .25

---- _Same._ No. 798. Explorations in Newfoundland and Labrador in
1887. By F. A. Lucas. From report of the National Museum, 1888-'89.
Washington. 1891. 22pp., 1 pl.

---- _Same._ No. 799. Preliminary handbook of the department of geology
of the U.S. Nat. Museum. By G. P. Merrill. From the report of the Nat.
Museum, 1888-'89. Washington, 1891. 52pp.
                                                            .15

---- _Same._ No. 800. Plates prepared between the years 1849 and 1859
to accompany a report on the forest trees of North America. By Asa
Gray. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 4pp., 23 col. pls.

---- _Same._ No. 801. Experiments in aerodynamics. By S. P. Langley.
Washington, 1891. 4^o. iii, 1-115pp., 10 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- _Same._ No. 802. Proceedings of the Regents and report of the
Executive committee for 1889-'90, etc. From Smithsonian report 1890.
Washington, 1891. 35pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 803. The squaring of the circle. By Herman Schubert.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 26pp.

---- _Same._ No. 804. The progress of astronomy for 1889-1890. By
William C. Winlock. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington,
1891. 64pp.
                                                            .20

---- _Same._ No. 805. Mathematical theories of the earth. By Robert
Simpson Woodward. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington,
1891. 20pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 806. On the physical structure of the earth. By Henry
Hennessy. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 21pp.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 807. Glacial geology. By James Geikie, F.R.S. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 10pp.
                                                            .05

---- _Same._ No. 808. The history of the Niagara river. By G. K.
Gilbert. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 29pp.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 809. The Mediterranean, physical and historical. By
Sir R. L. Playfair. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington,
1891. 20pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 810. Stanley and the map of Africa. By J. Scott
Keltie. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 17pp.

.05

---- _Same._ No. 811. Antarctic explorations. By G. S. Griffiths. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 14pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 812. The history of geodetic operations in Russia. By
B. Witskowski and J. H. Gore. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 12pp.
                                                            .05

---- _Same._ No. 813. Quartz fibers. By C. V. Boys. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 22pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 814. D. Koenig's researches on the physical basis of
musical harmony, and timbre. By Sylvanus P. Thompson. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 27pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 815. The chemical problems of to-day. By Victor Meyer.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 17pp.
                                                            .10

---- <i>Same.</i. No. 816. The photographic image. By Raphael Meldola,
F.R.S. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 14pp.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 817. A tropical botanic garden. By M. Treub.
Translated. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891.
20pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 818. Temperature and life. By Henry de Varigny.
Translated. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891.
24pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 819. Morphology of the blood corpuscles. By Charles
Sedgwick Minot. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891.
6pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .05

---- _Same._ No. 820. Weismann's theory of heredity. By George J.
Romanes. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 16pp.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 821. The ascent of man. By Frank Baker. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 22pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 822. The antiquity of man. By John Evans, F.R.S. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891, 10pp.
                                                            .05

---- _Same._ No. 823. The primitive home of the Aryans. By A. H. Sayce.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 15pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 824. The pre-historic races of Italy. By Isaac Taylor.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 12pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 825. The age of bronze in Egypt. By Oscar Montélius.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 19pp., 6 pls.,
6 l.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 826. Progress of anthropology in 1890. By O. T. Mason.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 82pp., 4 pls.
.25

---- _Same._ No. 827. A primitive urn buried. By Dr. J. F. Snyder. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 7pp., 2 pls.
                                                            .05

---- _Same._ No. 828. Manners and customs of the Mohaves. By George A.
Allen. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 2pp.
                                                            .02

---- _Same._ No. 829. Criminal anthropology. By Thomas Wilson. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 72pp.
                                                            .20

---- _Same._ No. 830. Color-vision and color-blindness. By R. Brudenell
Carter. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 20pp.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 831. Technology and civilization. By F. Reuleaux. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 18pp.
                                                            .10

---- _Same._ No. 832. The Ramsden dividing engine. By J. E. Watkins.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 21pp., 3 pls.
.10

---- _Same._ No. 833. A memoir of Elias Loomis. By H. A. Newton. From
the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 32pp.
                                                            .10

    _Note:_ With a list of Prof. Loomis' writings.

---- _Same._ No. 834. A memoir of William Kitchin Parker, F.R.S. (From
_Nature_.) From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 6pp.
.05

---- _Same._ No. 835. Sale list of publications of the Smithsonian
Institution, January, 1892. Washington, 1892. 27pp.

---- _Same._ No. 836. Report of S. P. Langley, Secretary of the
Smithsonian Institution for the year ending June 30, 1891. Washington,
1891. iii, 1-63pp.

---- Bureau of Ethnology. Seventh annual report of the bureau of
ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution 1885-'86. By
J. W. Powell, director. Washington, 1891. xliii, 409pp., 27 pls.
                                                     Paper 1.50
                                                     Cloth 2.50

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 107; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    ACCOMPANYING PAPERS.

    Indian linguistic families of America, north of Mexico, by J. W.
    Powell. The Mind[=e]'wiwin or "Grand medicine society" of the
    Ojibway, by W. J. Hoffman.

    The Sacred formulas of the Cherokees, by James Mooney.

---- ---- Bibliography of the Algonquian languages. By J. C. Pilling.
Washington, 1891. x+614pp., 82 facsimiles.
                                                           1.50

---- ---- Omaha and Ponka letters. By J. O. Dorsey. Washington, 1891.
127pp.
                                                            .40

---- ---- Catalogue of prehistoric works east of the Rocky mountains.
By Cyrus Thomas. Washington, 1891. 246pp., 17 pls.
                                                           1.00


SNYDER, J. F. A primitive urn burial. From the Smithsonian report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 7pp., 2 pls.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 827.


SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FLORISTS. Report from the committee on agriculture
favoring bill (H.R. 4437) to incorporate the society. February 27,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 476; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SOCIETY OF COLONIAL DAMES OF AMERICA. Report from the committee on the
library favoring bill to incorporate the society. February 10, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 256; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SOLDIERS' HOMES. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill (H.R. 3867) concerning appointment of officers in National Home
for disabled volunteers. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 250; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SORSBY, WILLIAM B. Orchilla in Ecuador. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 6-7.


SOUTH DAKOTA. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
granting land to S. Dakota for an asylum for the insane, etc. February
17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 385; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SPAIN. Population of Spain and its colonies. Report by consul Bowen.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 267-268.


SPENCER, GUILFORD LAWSON. Foods and food adulterants. Tea, coffee and
cocoa preparations. Washington, 1892. vii, 875-1014, vipp., pls. 39-47.
.50

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 13, part 7.


---- WILLIAM C. Findings of a board of officers upon the physical
condition of W. C. Spencer at the time of his resignation. December 10,
1891. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill for
restoration of W. C. Spencer to the army. February 12, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 299; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SPOKANE FALLS, WASH. Report from the committee on public buildings and
grounds favoring bill for erection of a public building at Spokane
Falls. January 19, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 48; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SPRAGUE, HORATIO J., _Consul._ Gibraltar in 1890. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 124-126.

---- Affairs in Gibraltar. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 584-587.


SPRINGER, ADAMS J. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill to remove charge of desertion against A. J. Springer.
January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 73; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STARKLOFF, HUGO M., _Consul._ Marine insurance in Bremen. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular reports no. 140, pp. 158-159.


STATE BANKS. Senator Butler's resolution favoring repeal of taxes on
state bank circulation. January 11, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 34; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STATE DEPARTMENT. Letter from the Secretary of State requesting
authority to dispose of useless papers. February 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 128; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Message from the President showing the duties collected by
Venezuela and Colombia upon the imports of products of the U.S. April
1, 1892. 6pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 68; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of State in reference to unbound and
bound public documents for the use of the State Department. April 9,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 189; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of an appropriation to execute the treaty stipulations
between the U.S. and Great Britain concluded February 29 and April 18,
1892, in relation to the tribunal of arbitration at Paris. April 25,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 212; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Bureau of Statistics. Reports from consuls of the U.S. Vol. xxxvi.
Nos. 128-131. May-August, 1891. Washington, 1891. 664+xpp.
                                                           1.60

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ Vol. xxxvii. Nos. 132-135. Sep.-Dec., 1891.
Washington, 1891. 589+xiiipp.
                                                           1.60

---- ---- _Same._ Vol. xxxviii. Nos. 136-139. Jan.-April, 1892.
Washington, 1892. xvi+810pp.
                                                           1.60

---- ---- _Same._ No. 140. May, 1892. Washington, 1892. 192pp.
                                                            .40

---- ---- Special consular reports. Vol. iii. Streets and highways.
Washington, 1891. 592pp.
                                                           1.25

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 20; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ Vol. iv. Port regulations. Washington, 1891. 732pp.
                                                           1.25

---- ---- _Same._ Vol. v. Canals and irrigation. Washington, 1891.
346pp.
                                                           1.00

---- _Same._ Vol. vi. Coal and coal consumption in Spanish America. Gas
in foreign countries. India rubber. Washington, 1892. 1 l., 601pp.
                                                           1.20

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 153; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Special consular reports. India rubber. Washington, 1892. pp.
349-601.
                                                            .40

---- ---- _Same._ The slave trade in foreign countries. Washington,
1892. 128pp.
                                                            .40

---- Bureau of American Republics. First annual report, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 50pp.
                                                            .25

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 8, pt. 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Bulletin no. 7. Brazil. Washington, 1891. 169pp., 6 pls., 1
map.
                                                            .75

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 8, pt. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 9. Mexico. [Historical, political and statistical
sketch.] By A. W. Ferguson. Washington, [1892.] 3+234pp., 5 pls., 1
map.
                                                           1.00

    Sen. ex. doc no. 8, pt. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 31. Costa Rica. Washington, 1892. iv+146pp., 24
pls.
                                                            .50

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 8, pt. 6; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- _Same._ No. 33. January, 1892. Colombia. [Washington, 1892.]
138pp., 22 pls., 1 map.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Same._ No. 35. March, 1892. Breadstuffs in Latin America.
(Compiled from official returns to October 1, 1891.) Washington, 1892.
91pp.
                                                            .30


STATISTICAL ABSTRACT. Letters from the Secretary of the Treasury with
draft of a bill to provide for the printing of the annual volume
entitled "Statistical Abstract of the U.S." January 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 54; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STATISTICAL ABSTRACT. _See_ Treasury Department, Bureau of Statistics.


STEAM VESSELS. Report from the committee on commerce to accompany bill
(S. 744) to amend sec. 4400 Rev. Stat., concerning the regulation of
steam vessels. January 21, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 86; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury recommending an
amendment to the law for the regulation of steam vessels. April 7,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 71; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STEELE, J. and J. Findings of the court of claims in the case of J. and
J. Steele _v._ U.S. January 13, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 41; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STEVENSON, JAMES. Biographical notice of. 4pp.

    U.S. Nat. Mus. rep. 1888-'89, pp. 187-190.


STILES, C. W., and HASSALL, A. The color of a host and its relation to
parasitism. 2pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 265-266.


<B>STIMSON, HIRAM. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to correct the military record of H. Stimson. February
10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 258; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STOKES, HENRY NEWLIN. On a petroleum from Cuba. 7pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 98-104.

---- On a supposed mineral resin from Livingston, Montana. 4pp.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, pp. 105-108.

---- Analysis of limestone from Kansas 1p.

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 78, p. 124.


WILLIAM B., AND OR'S. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of Stokes and others (as sureties). January 20, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 58; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


STOUT, HENRY, _Consul._ Fertilizers in Japan. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 132-133.


STOWE, MRS. SARAH D. (LOCKE). Mount Holyoke seminary and college, Mass.
Sketch. 20pp., 4 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 400-420.


STREET, HARLOW L. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of H. L. Street. (Restoration to rank.)
February 16, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 353; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SUGAR TRUST. Resolution reported from the committee on the judiciary
requesting the Attorney-general to ascertain whether the sugar trust
has violated the act of July 2, 1890. May 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 215; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the attorney-general transmitting information as to
whether the sugar trust has violated the act of July 2, 1890. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 225; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SUITS. Report from the committee on the judiciary favoring bill to
regulate the revival of suits in certain cases (i. e., the change of
persons holding office at the time of commencement of action). February
17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 383; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SULLIVAN, JOHN. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of J. Sullivan. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 69; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SUTTON, S. J., and or's. Findings of the court of claims in the causes
of S. J. Sutton, H. Williams, and A. R. Thomas, respectively, v. U.S.
January 25, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 52; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SWAMP-LAND GRANTS. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill (H.R. 5892) to adjust the swamp-land grants, to fix a limitation
for the filing of claims thereunder, &c. February 12, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 296; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


SWEET, CHESTER B. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill for the relief of C. B. Sweet. (Error in price of land.) January
11, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 6; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- WILLIAM M. Cast-iron pipe industry in the United States. 4^o. 6pp.

    U.S. Census 1890: Bulletin no. 168.


SWINGLE, W. T. Some Peronosporaceæ in the herbarium of the Division of
vegetable pathology. 22pp.

    Journal of Mycology, vol. iv, 7, no. 2, pp. 109-130.

---- Treatment of smuts of oats and wheat. Washington, 1892. 8pp., 1
pl.

    Agr'l Dep't, Farmers' Bulletin no. 5.


TACOMA, WASH. Report from the committee on public buildings and grounds
favoring bill to erect a public building at Tacoma. January 19, 1892.
4pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TALKINGTON, ISAAC W. Report from the committee on public lands favoring
bill for the relief of I. W. Talkington for money erroneously paid for
lands. February 29, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 481; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TALLEY, ROBERT.<B> Findings of the court of claims in the case of
Robert Talley _v._ the U.S. March 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 113; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TAMPA, FL. Report from the committee on public buildings and grounds
favoring the erection of a public building at Tampa, Fl. January 12,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 12; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TAPP, W. J., AND CO. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of W. J. Tapp & Co. (For rebate of duty.) February 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 93; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TARIFF. Memorial of Nat. association of wool manufacturers against any
change in the tariff act. January 11, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 37; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on ways and means to accompany bill
(H.R. 6007) to place wool on the free list and reduce the duties on
woolen goods. [With views of the minority.] March 1, 1892. 89pp.
                                                            .25

    H.R. rep. no. 501; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on ways and means to accompany bill
(H.R. 6005) to place binding twine on the free list. [With views of the
minority.] March 1, 1891. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 502; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on ways and means to accompany bill
(H.R. 6006) to admit free of duty bagging for cotton, machinery for
manufacturing bagging, cotton ties and cotton gins. [With views of the
minority.] March 1, 1892. 10pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 503; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on ways and means to accompany bill
(H.R. 8033) relating to the import duty on tin plate, terne plate, and
taggers tin. [With views of the minority.] April 9 and 25, 1892.
8+18pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1040, pts. 1 & 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on ways and means to accompany bill
(H.R. 8535) to limit the amount of wearing apparel and personal effects
which may be imported free of duty. June 1, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1537; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on finance (under Sen. res. of March 3,
1891) on the effect of the tariff laws upon imports and exports,
growth, production, prices, wages, etc. [With views of the minority,
and testimony.] May 3 and June 7, 1892. [Effect of tariff on trade
between the U.S. and Canada.] 83+95pp.

    Sen. reps. nos. 619 and 788; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TAYLOR, ISAAC. The pre-historic races of Italy. From the Smithsonian
report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 12pp.
                                                            .05

    Smithsonian pub. no. 824.


---- JOHN W. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to correct the military record of J. W. Taylor. February 4, 1892.
1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 165; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- THOMAS, _m. d._ Food products. 2. Eight edible and twelve
poisonous mushrooms of the United States, with directions for the
culture and culinary preparation of the edible species. Reprinted from
the report of the Secretary of Agriculture for 1890. Washington, 1891.
16pp., 6 pls.


---- WILLIAM G. Bismarck the typical German. (Abstract.) 1p.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, p. 59.


TENEMENT HOUSE LABOR. Mr. Hoar's resolution for an inquiry into the
so-called sweating system of tenement labor. January 18, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 71; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on manufactures to accompany H.R. mis.
doc. no. 71. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 164; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TERNE, BRUNO. On sources of errors in the determination of potash. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 150-152.


THOMAS, CYRUS. Catalogue of prehistoric works east of the Rocky
mountains. Washington, 1891. 246pp., 17 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Smithsonian Institution: Bureau of Ethnology.


THOMPSON, JAMES M. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to remove charge of desertion against J. M. Thompson.
March 1, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 497; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- SYLVANUS P. Dr. Koenig's researches on the physical basis of
musical harmony and timbre. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 27pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 814.

---- The present position of the technical instruction question. 6pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1063-1068.


---- WILLIAM J., _U.S. N._ Te Pito te Henua, or Easter island. From
report of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp. 447-552. Washington, 1891.
106pp., 49 pls.


TIBBITS, JOHN A., _Consul._ Weavers' wages in Bradford. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 180-183.


TICE, ISAAC P. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
relief of estate of J. P. Tice. (Use of spirit-meter.) January 27,
1892. 5pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 120; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TILLOTSON, W. D., _Consul-general._ Foreign commerce of Japan in 1890.
4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 129-132.


TIN PLATE. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury transmitting
information as to drawbacks on tin plate. February 23, 1893. 7pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 138; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TITTMANN, OTTO HILGARD. Weights and measures. The relation of the yard
to the metre. Appendix no. 16, Report of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey for 1890. Washington, 1891. 8pp.
                                                            .15

---- Weights and measures. The national photo-types of the standard
metre and kilogramme, U.S. customary and metric standards.
Transportation of the national prototypes from Paris to Washington,
their official certification and their deposit in the office of weights
and measures. Appendix no. 18, Report of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 20pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .25


TOWNSHEND, CHARLES HERVEY. Geographical explorations. Notes of an early
chart of Long Island Sound and its approaches. Appendix no. 20, U.S.
Coast and Geodetic report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 6pp., 1 map.
.20


TRACY, S. M. Coöperative branch stations for special work with grasses
and forage plants in the south. 8pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Annual report 1891, pp. 344-351.


TRADE MARKS. Report from the committee on patents to accompany bill
(H.R. 5760) to amend the trade mark act of 1881. February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 410; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TRAIL, CHARLES B., _Consul._ American pork in France. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 265-267.


TRAVIS, M. M. Adverse report from the committee on Indian affairs on
bill for the relief of Rev. M. M. Travis. February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 348; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TREASURY DEPARTMENT. Annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury
1891. Washington, 1891. 138pp.
                                                            .25

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1447.

---- Annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the state of the
finances for the year 1891. Washington, 1891. cxxxviii +866pp., 4
folded leaves.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess. And Treasury Dep't doc. no.
1447, 3d ed.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, transmitting estimates
of appropriations required for the service of the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1893. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 402pp.
                                                           2.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess. Also Treasury Dep't doc. no.
1476.

---- Catalogue of title-entries of books and other articles entered in
the office of the librarian of Congress at Washington, under the
copyright law, from January 2 to July 2, 1892: wherein the copyright
has been completed by the deposit of two copies in this office. [Nos.
26 to 52.] 4^o. Subscription,
                                                           5.00

---- Customs regulations of the U.S., provided for the instruction and
guidance of officers of customs. Washington, 1892. xi, 1-613pp., 4 pls.
                                                           4.00

---- Abstract of official emoluments of officers of the customs service
received by them during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. 9pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 120; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Detailed statement of the refunds of customs duties, etc., for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. --pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 124; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- A brief history of coinage legislation in the United States.
Washington, 1891. 20pp.
                                                            .15

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1453.

---- Statement of the public debt and of the cash in the Treasury of
the United States for the month of January, 1892. _Same._ For February,
1892. _Same._ For March, 1892. _Same._ For April, 1892. _Same._ For
May, 1892. _Same._ For June, 1892. _Broadsides._

---- Synopsis of decisions of the Treasury Department and of the board
of U.S. general appraisers on the construction of the tariff,
navigation and other laws in the months of December, 1891, and January,
1892. 152+xvipp. each,
                                                            .50

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1494.

---- _Same._ In January and February, 1892. pp. 153-234+xiv.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1499.

---- _Same._ In February and March, 1892. pp. 235-370+xiv.

    Treasury Dep't, doc. no. 1502.

---- _Same._ March and April, 1892. pp. 371-526+xviii.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1510.

---- _Same._ April and May, 1892. pp. 527-645+xv.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1514.

---- Index-reference catalogue of the library of the Treasury
Department. Washington, 1891. 517pp.
                                                           1.50

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1141.

---- Report of the contingent expenses of the Treasury Department for
1890-'91. 31pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 44; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the pay of
the surveyor of customs at Sioux City, Iowa. January 18, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 19; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement showing the value of trade in merchandise between the
    U.S. and Brazil, Cuba, Puerto Rico and Santo Domingo since reciprocity
treaties went into effect, compared with preceding periods. January 29,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 107; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of deficiency appropriation for printing for the Treasury
Department. February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 39; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Additional estimates of deficiencies in appropriations for
1891-'92. February 13, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 131; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury concerning 4-1/2 per
cent. bonds. February 18, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 134; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury concerning the repeal of
laws relating to permanent and indefinite appropriations. March 4,
1892. 7pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 152; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury recommending an
appropriation for distinctive paper for checks and drafts. March 7,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the amount
of gold and silver certificates issued since January 1, 1878. March 10,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 160; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the effects
of the coinage act of July 14, 1890. March 23, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 64; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Additional estimate of appropriation for paper for checks for the
treasurer, etc., for 1892-'93. March 26, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 175; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury respecting the amount of
gold and silver coinage in 1891-'92. March 29, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 177; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury submitting a request
from the Director of the mint for an immediate appropriation of $50,000
for recoinage of subsidiary coin. March 30, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 181; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés in the department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified civil service, and who are
not specifically authorized by law. April 7, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 72; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the purchase
of silver under the act of July 14, 1890. 69pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 78; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury relative to the purchase
of silver under the law of 1890. May 2, 1890. 4pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 90; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Auditor, First. Annual report of the first auditor for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 18pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1448.

---- Auditor, Second. Annual report of the second auditor for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 21pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1462.

---- Auditor, Third. Annual report of the third auditor for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 16pp., 4 folded leaves.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1452.

---- Auditor, Fourth. Annual report of the fourth auditor for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 16pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1467.

---- Auditor, Fifth. Annual report of the fifth auditor for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 38pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1472.

---- Auditor, Sixth. Annual report of the sixth auditor for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 6pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1458.

---- Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Report of the chief of the
bureau of engraving and printing for the fiscal year 1890-'91.
Washington, 1891. 18pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1460.

---- ---- Memorial of employés of the bureau asking an additional leave
of fifteen days per annum. January 21, 1892. 12pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 50; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on education and labor favoring bill (S.
1768) to allow thirty days leave of absence to employés of the bureau.
February 4, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 163; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Report from the committee on labor favoring bill (H.R. 4537)
granting thirty days leave of absence to employés. February 18, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 408; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Bureau of Navigation. Twenty-third annual list of merchant vessels
of the U.S., for the year ended June 30, 1891. Washington, 1892. lviii,
1-439pp., 1 pl.
                                                           2.00

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1444.

---- Bureau of statistics. Annual report in regard to imported
merchandise entered for consumption in the United States, with rates of
duty and amounts of duty collected during the year ending June 30,
1891. Washington, 1891. xxxvi _a_, 1-173pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Annual report and statements of the chief of the bureau on
the foreign commerce and navigation, immigration and tonnage of the
    U.S. for the year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1892. cxiii+1120pp.
1.00

---- ---- Quarterly report [no. 1, 1891-'92] relative to the imports,
exports, immigration and navigation of the United States for the three
months ending September 30, 1891. Washington, 1892. vi, 1-324pp.
                                                            .50

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1399.

---- ---- _Same._ [No. 2, 1891-'92.] For the three months ending
December 31, 1891. Washington, 1892. v, 325-517pp.
                                                            .50

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1399.

---- ---- Summary statement [no. 7, January, 1891-'92] of the imports
and exports of the United States for January, 1892, and for seven
months ending the same, compared with the corresponding periods of
1891. (Corrected to February 27, 1892.) 4^o. 34pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1302.

---- ---- Summary statement [no. 8, February, 1891-'92] of the imports
and exports of the U.S. for the month ending February 29, 1892, and for
the eight months ending the same, compared with the corresponding
periods of 1891. (Corrected to March 25, 1892.) 4^o. 34pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1302.

---- ---- Summary statement [no. 9, 1891-'92] of the imports and
exports of the United States for the month ending March 31, 1892, and
for nine months ending the same, compared, etc. (Corrected to May 10,
1892.) 4^o. 39pp.

---- ---- Summary statement [no. 10, April, 1891-'92.] for the month
ending April 30, 1892, and for ten months ending same. (Corrected to
May 26, 1892.) 4^o. 34pp.

---- ---- Statement of foreign commerce and immigration for January,
1892. (Corrected to February 20, 1892.) 6pp.

---- ---- _Same._ For February, 1892. (Corrected to March 10, 1892.)
6pp.

---- ---- _Same._ For March, 1892. (Corrected to April 20, 1892.) 6pp.

---- ---- _Same._ For April, 1892. (Corrected to May 19, 1892.) 6pp.

---- ---- _Same._ For May, 1892. (Corrected to June 16, 1892.) 6pp.

---- ---- Exports of mineral oils and cotton. January, 1892. _Same._
February, 1892. _Same._ March, 1892. _Same._ April, 1892. _Same._ May,
1892. _Same._ June, 1892. _Broadsides._

---- ---- Exports of breadstuffs, January, 1892. _Same._ February,
1892. _Same._ March, 1892. _Same._ April, 1892. _Same._ May, 1892.
_Same._ June, 1892. Broadsides.

---- ---- Exports of the principal articles of domestic provisions.
January, 1892. _Same._ February, 1892. _Same._ March, 1892. _Same._
April, 1892. _Same._ May, 1892. _Same._ June, 1892. _Broadsides._

---- Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1891. Fourteenth
number. Washington, 1892. xiii+344pp.
                                                            .50

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 53; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Communication from the chief of the bureau asking an
appropriation for an additional clerk for his office. May 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 228; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Commissioner of Customs. Report of the commissioner of customs for
the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 11pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1465.

---- Comptroller, First. Annual report of the first comptroller for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 16pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1459.

---- Comptroller, Second. Annual report of the second comptroller for
the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 6pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1557.

---- Comptroller of the Currency. [Twenty-ninth] annual report of the
comptroller of the currency to the 1st session of the 52th Congress of
the United States, December 7, 1891. Washington, 1891. (1)+86pp.
                                                            .25

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1481, 1st ed.

---- ----Annual report of the comptroller of the currency to the 1st
session of the 52d Congress. December 7, 1891. Washington, 1891. 2
vols.
                                                           1.50

---- Internal Revenue. Report of the commissioner of internal revenue
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 87pp.
                                                            .20

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1450.

---- ---- Report of the commissioner of internal revenue for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 1891. [2d Edition, with tables.] Washington, 1891.
421pp.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess. Also Treasury Dep't doc. no.
1450.

---- ---- Series 7, no. 11. Revised supplement no. 1. Gaugers' weighing
manual, embracing regulations and tables for determining the taxable
quantity of distilled spirits by weighing. January 26, 1892.
Washington, 1892. 12^o. 17+501pp.
                                                           2.50

---- Light-House Board. Statement relative to the appropriation for
salaries of light keepers. February 15, 1892. 22pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 38; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Marine Hospital. Annual report of the supervising surgeon general
of the marine hospital service for the fiscal year 1891. Washington,
1891. 354pp.
                                                           1.00

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1466.

---- ---- Abstract of sanitary reports. Vol. 7, nos. 1-26. January
1-July 1, 1892. pp. 1-284.

---- Mint. [Nineteenth] annual report of the director of the Mint to
the Secretary of the Treasury for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 291pp.
                                                           1.00

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1468.

---- ---- Report of the director of the mint upon the production of the
precious metals in the United States during the calendar year 1891.
Washington, 1892. 321pp.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 200; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Request of the director for $50,000 to continue the
re-coinage of uncurrent coins. February 15, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 36; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Miscellaneous Division. Report on immigration to the chief of the
miscellaneous division, 1891. Washington, 1891. 10pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1484.

---- Register. Report of the Register of the Treasury for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 218pp.
                                                            .25

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1473.

---- ---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury submitting a
proposed amendment to the appropriation bill, relating to the office of
asst. register. June 7, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 256; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Supervising Architect. Annual report for the year ending September
30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 235pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1477.

---- Supervising Special Agent. Annual report of the supervising
special agent for 1891. Washington, 1891. 12pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no.

---- Treasurer. Annual report of the Treasurer of the United States for
the fiscal year ending June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 114pp.
                                                            .25

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1478.

---- ---- Fourteenth annual report of the Treasurer of the U.S. on the
sinking fund and funded debt of the District of Columbia. Washington,
1891. 45pp.

    Treasury Dep't doc. no. 1461.


TREMAIN, MARY. Slavery in the District of Columbia. The policy of
Congress and the struggle for abolition. (Abstract.) 5pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep., 1890, pp. 89-93.


TRENT, WILLIAM PETERFIELD. A Virginia bill of attainder. The case of
Josiah Philips. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 67-68.


TREUB, M. A tropical botanic garden. From the Smithsonian report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 20pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 817.


TREUTLEN, JOHN R. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of J. R. Treutlen. February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 369; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TRIPLER, EUNICE. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of E. Tripler, widow of C. S. Tripler.
(Compensation for "Tripler's manual.") January 20, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 50; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


TRUE, FREDERICK WILLIAM. The puma or American lion. (_Felis concolor_
of Linnæus.) From Report of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp. 591-608.
Washington, 1891. 20pp., 1 pl.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., JUNE, 1892.    No. 6.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.

CATALOGUE.

JUNE, 1892.


TUCKERMAN, ALFRED. Bibliography of the chemical influence of light.
Washington, 1891. iii, 1-22pp.

    Smithsonian pub. no. 785.


UNION PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY. Report of the government directors of,
to the Secretary of the Interior. 1891. Washington, 1891. 6pp.


UNITED STATES BOARD ON GEOGRAPHIC NAMES. Report of the Board. 1891.
Washington, 1892. 58pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 16; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

_Note:_ Appendix A and B contain decisions of the board.

---- Reports from the committee on printing, on the report of the U.S.
Board on geographic names. January 11 and February 10 and 26, 1892.
1+1+1pp.

    Sen. rep. nos. 8 and 210, and H.R. rep. no. 474; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNITED STATES BUREAU OF EDUCATION. _See_ Interior Dep't, Bureau of
Education.


UNITED STATES CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION. Eighth annual report, July 1,
1890, to June 30, 1891. Washington, 1891. 219pp., 8 pls.
                                                            .50

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 8; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on printing favoring resolution to
print 23,000 copies of the 8th report of the commission. March 9, and
May 10, 1892. 1+1pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1337 and Sen. rep. no. 341; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the commission as to persons employed not
specifically appropriated for. April 12, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 125; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Schedule of examinations for 1892. Departmental, railway mail, and
Indian services, with instructions to applicants. 1892. Washington,
1892. 25pp.

---- Information relating to the appointment of stenographers in the
various departments. June 10, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 270; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNITED STATES COAST AND GEODETIC SURVEY. Report of the superintendent
showing the progress of the work during the fiscal year ending with
June, 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. xxix, 780pp., 67 plates and charts.
3.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 80; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Changes made in the force of employés in the coast and geodetic
survey during 1890. March 30, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 180; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Statement of expenditures for the fiscal year 1890-'91. 28pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 151; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Tide tables for the Atlantic coast of the United States, together
with 206 stations on the Atlantic coast of British America, for the
year 1893. Washington, 1892. 250pp.
                                                            .25

---- Pacific coast pilot. Alaska. Part 1. Dixon entrance to Yakutat
bay, with inland passage from strait of Fuca to Dixon entrance. 3d
edition. Washington, 1891. Folio. 243pp., 19 pls.
                                                           2.00

---- Terrestrial magnetism. Results of magnetic observations recorded
at Los Angeles, California, 1882-1889. Part 1. Absolute measures.
Observations by M. Baker, C. Terry, Jr., and R. E. Halter. Discussion
and report by C. A. Schott. Appendix no. 8, Report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 4^o. 45pp.
                                                            .35

---- _Same._ Part 2. Differential measures. Appendix no. 9, Report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 215pp., 9 pls.
                                                           1.25

---- Physical hydrography. The gulf stream. Methods of the
investigation and results of the research. By J. E. Pillsbury. Appendix
no. 10, Report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 162pp., 25 pls.
                                                           1.25

---- Geodesy. Determinations of gravity and of the magnetic elements in
connection with the U.S. expedition to the west coast of Africa.
1889-'90. A report by E. D. Preston. Appendix no. 12, Report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 4^o. 64pp., 11 pls.
                                                            .75

---- Mathematics. On an approximate method of computing probable error.
By C. H. Kummell. On the determination by least squares of the relation
between two variables. By M. Merriman. Appendix no. 13, Report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 13pp.
                                                            .20

---- Physical hydrography. On the use of observations of currents for
prediction purposes. By J. F. Hayford. Appendix no. 14, Report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 15pp.
                                                            .15

---- Physical hydrography. Tides at Sandy Hook, observed and predicted
times and heights during 1889. By J. F. Hayford. Appendix no. 15,
Report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 12pp., 2 charts.
                                                            .15

---- Weights and measures. The relation of the yard to the metre. By O.
H. Tittmann. Appendix no. 16, Report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o.
8pp.
                                                            .15

---- Geodesy. International geodetic association. Ninth conference.
Address of George Davidson. Appendix no. 17, Report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 4^o. 15pp.
                                                            .15

---- Weights and measures. The national prototypes of the standard
metre and kilogramme. U.S. customary and metric standards.
Transportation of the national prototypes from Paris to Washington,
their official opening and certification and the deposit in the office
of weights and measures. By O. H. Tittmann. Appendix no. 18, Report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 25pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .20

---- Geographical explorations. Early expeditions to the region of
Bering sea and strait. From reports and journals of V. I. Bering.
Translated by W. H. Dall. Appendix no. 19, Report for 1890. Washington,
1891. 4^o. 18pp., 2 maps.
                                                            .75

---- Geographical explorations. Notes on an early chart of Long Island
Sound and its approaches. By C. H. Townshend. Appendix no. 20, Report
for 1890. Washington, 1891. 4^o. 6pp., map.
                                                            .20


UNITED STATES CONSULAR REPORTS. Reports from the consuls of the United
States. Vol. xxxvi, nos. 128-131, May-August, 1891. Washington, 1891.
664pp.
                                                           1.60

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Vol. xxxvii, nos. 132-135, September-December, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 589+xiiipp., 3 pls.
                                                           1.60

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 154; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Vol. xxxviii, nos. 136-139. January-April, 1892.
Washington, 1892. xvi, 1-810pp.
                                                           1.60

_Note:_ No. 139 contains "Local transportation" and "Underground
conduits."

---- _Same._ May, 1892, no. 140. Washington, 1892. 192pp.
                                                            .40

---- Special consular reports. Vol. iii. Streets and highways in
foreign countries. Washington, 1891. 592pp.
                                                           1.25

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 20; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Vol. iv. Port regulations in foreign countries, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 732pp.
                                                           1.25

---- _Same._ Vol. v. Canals and irrigation in foreign countries, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 346pp.
                                                           1.00

---- _Same._ Vol. vi. Coal and coal consumption in Spanish-America. Gas
in foreign countries. India rubber. Washington, 1892. 1 l., 601pp.
                                                           1.20

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 153; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Gas in foreign countries. Washington, 1891. pp.
89-346+iiipp.
                                                            .40

---- _Same._ The slave trade in foreign countries. Washington, 1892.
128pp.
                                                            .40


_UNITED STATES FISH COMMISSION._ Report of the commissioner respecting
the establishment of fish-cultural stations in the Rocky Mountain
region and Gulf states. February 8, 1892. Washington, 1892. iv+88pp.,
36 pls.
                                                            .75

---- Report on the fisheries of the Pacific coast of the United States.
By J. W. Collins. [Extracted from the report of the Commissioner for
1888.] Washington, 1891. 269pp., 49 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- The chemical composition and nutritive value of food-fishes and
aquatic invertebrates. By W. O. Atwater. [Extracted from the report of
the U.S. Fish Commission for 1888.] Washington, 1891. 192pp., 9 pls.
.60

---- A preliminary review of the apodal fishes or eels inhabiting the
waters of America and Europe. By D. S. Jordan and B. M. Davis.
[Extracted from the report of the U.S. Fish Commission for 1888.]
Washington, 1891. 97pp., 9 pls.
                                                            .50

---- The fishing vessels and boats of the Pacific coast. By J. W.
Collins. [Extracted from the bulletin of the U.S. Fish Commission for
1890, pp. 13-48.] Washington, 1892. 38pp., 13 pls.
                                                            .50

---- Observations on the aquaria of the U.S. Fish Commission at central
station, Washington, D.C. By W. P. Seal. [Extracted from the bulletin
of the U.S. Fish Commission for 1890, pp. 1-12.] Washington, 1892.
14pp., 4 pls.

---- Statement showing expenditures during the year ending June 30,
1891. 9pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 16; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of an appropriation to reimburse the fish commission for
use of steamer _Albatross_ in conveying agents of the U.S. to Bering
sea. January 28, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 103; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Commissioner submitting estimates of
appropriations in connection with the urgent deficiency bill. February
1, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 109; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of appropriation for the completion of the fish hatchery
in Vermont. June 7, 1892. 2pp.

H. R. ex. doc. no. 255; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNITED STATES GEOGRAPHICAL AND GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN
REGION. Contributions to North American ethnology, vol. 6. Washington,
1890. 4^o. xviii+794pp.
                                                           3.00

    CONTENTS.

    The Cegiha language. By J. O. Dorsey.

---- Contributions to N. American ethnology, vol. 7. Washington, 1892.
4^o. x, 1-665pp.
                                                           3.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 26; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Dakota-English Dictionary. By S. R. Riggs. Edited by J. O. Dorsey.
    Washington, 1890.


UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Tenth annual report of the United
States geological survey to the Secretary of the Interior, 1888-'89. By
J. W. Powell, director. Part I.--Geology. [Part II.--Irrigation.]
Washington, 1890. 2 vols. xv, 1-774: viii, 1-123pp., 98 pls.
                                                           3.00

    ACCOMPANYING PAPERS.

    General account of the fresh water morasses of the U.S., with a
    description of the dismal swamp district of Virginia and North
    Carolina. By N. S. Shaler.

    The Penokee iron-bearing series of Michigan and Wisconsin. By R. D.
    Irving and C. A. Van Hise.

    The fauna of the lower cambrian olenellus zone. By C. D. Wolcott.

---- Eleventh annual report of the U.S. geological survey to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1889-'90. By J. W. Powell, director. Part
II, Irrigation. Washington, 1891. xiv, 1-395pp., 30 pls.
                                                           1.00

---- Monographs, vol. xvi. Washington, 1889. 4^o. 340pp., 53 pls.
                                                           1.00

    CONTENTS.

    The paleozoic fishes of North America. By J. S. Newbury.

---- Bulletin no. 71. Washington, 1891. 744pp.
                                                            .50

    CONTENTS.

    Index to the known fossil insects of the world, including myriapods
    and arachnids, by Samuel Hubbard Scudder.

---- _Same._ No. 72. Washington, 1891. 229pp.
                                                            .20

    CONTENTS.

    Altitudes between Lake Superior and Rocky mountains, by Warren
    Upham.

---- _Same._ No. 73. Washington, 1891. xii, 139pp., 6 pls.
                                                            .15

    CONTENTS.

    The viscosity of solids, by Carl Barus.

---- _Same._ No. 74. Washington, 1891. 119pp.
                                                            .15

    CONTENTS.

    The minerals of North Carolina, by Fred'k Augustus Georth.

---- _Same._ No. 75. Washington, 1891. 173pp.
                                                            .15

    CONTENTS.

    Record of North American geology for 1887 to 1889 inclusive, by
    Nelson Horatio Darton.

---- _Same._ No. 76. Washington, 1891. 393pp.
                                                            .25

    CONTENTS.

    A dictionary of altitudes in the United States (Second edition), by
    Henry Gannett.

---- _Same._ No. 77. Washington, 1891. 51pp., 4 pls.
                                                            .10

    CONTENTS.

    The Texan permean and its mesozoic types of fossils, by Charles A.
    White.

---- _Same._ No. 78. Washington, 1891. 131pp.
                                                            .15

    CONTENTS.

    Report of work done in the division of chemistry and physics mainly
    during the fiscal year 1889-'90. Frank Wigglesworth Clarke, chief
    chemist.

---- _Same._ No. 79. Washington, 1891. 33pp., 17 pls.
                                                            .10

    CONTENTS.

    A late volcanic eruption in northern California and its peculiar
    lava, by Joseph Silas Diller.

---- _Same._ No. 80. Washington, 1891. 279pp.
                                                            .20

    CONTENTS.

    Correlation papers. Devonian and Carboniferous, by Henry Shaler
    Williams.

---- _Same._ No. 81. Washington, 1891. 447pp., 3 pls.
                                                            .25

    CONTENTS.

    Correlation papers. Cambrian, by Charles Doolittle Wolcott.

---- _Same._ No. 82. Washington, 1891. 273pp., 3 pls.
                                                            .20

    CONTENTS.

    Correlation papers. Cretaceous, by Charles A. White.

---- _Same._ No. 83. Washington, 1891. 173pp., 2 pls.
                                                            .20

    CONTENTS.

    Correlation papers. Eocene, by William Bullock Clark.

---- _Same._ No. 91. Washington, 1891. 88pp.
                                                            .10

    CONTENTS.

    Record of North American geology for 1890, by Nelson Horatio Darton.

---- Bulletins nos. 66 to 70. [Contents already noted.] Washington,
1892. 321pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 21; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ No. 71. [Contents already noted.] Washington, 1892. 2 l.,
v+744pp.
                                                            .50

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 22; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Nos. 72 to 75. [Contents already noted.] Washington, 1892.
660pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 23; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ No. 76. [Contents already noted.]  Washington, 1892.
393pp.
                                                            .25

    H.R. mis. doc. no. --; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Nos. 77 to 80. [Contents already noted.] Washington, 1892.
494pp., 21 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. --; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Nos. 81 and 82. [Contents already noted]. Washington,
1892. 720pp., 6 pls.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Interior relative to reports of
the geological survey [and census bureau] upon irrigation and the
reclamation of lands. May 13, 1892. 73pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 100; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

_Note:_ Information as to reports and maps printed and in progress.

---- Suggestions for the preparation of manuscript and illustrations
for publication by the U.S. Geological Survey. By W. A. Croffut.
January, 1892. 15pp.


UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY. Annual report of the superintendent of
the U.S. military academy, 1891. Washington, 1891. 24pp.
                                                            .15

---- Report of the board of visitors to the West Point academy.
December 14, 1891. Washington, 1891. 122pp., 11 pls.
                                                            .35

---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution to print
2,500 copies of the report of the visitors to the military academy,
1891. December 22, 1891. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations to accompany bill
(H.R. 4636) making appropriations for the support of the U.S. military
academy for 1892-'93. March 30, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 925; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Reports from the committee on military affairs, etc., on bill
making appropriations for the military academy for 1892-'93. 2+4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 5 and Sen. rep. no. 363; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Bulletin No. 41. Bibliographies of
American naturalists. 5. The published writings of Dr. Charles Girard.
By G. Brown Goode. Washington, 1891. vi, 141pp., portrait.
                                                            .50

---- _Same._ No. 42. A preliminary descriptive catalogue of the
systematic collections in economic geology and metallurgy in the U.S.
Nat. Museum. By F. P. Dewey. Washington, 1891. xviii, 256pp., 34 pls.
1.50

---- Scientific results of explorations of the U.S. Fish commission
steamer _Albatross._ xxii. Descriptions of 34 new species of fishes
collected in 1888 and 1889 principally among the Santa Barbara islands
and in the gulf of California. By C. H. Gilbert. From proceedings of
the U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp. 539-566. [No. 880.] Washington, 1891.
28pp.

---- The biology of the hymenopterous insects of the family
_chalcididæ_. By L. O. Howard. From Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp.
567-588. [No. 881.] Washington, 1892. 22pp.

---- A critical review of the characters and variations of the snakes
of N. America. By E. D. Cope. From Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp.
589-694. [No. 882.] Washington, 1892. 106pp.

---- Note on the genus _Hiatula_ of Lacépède or _Tautoga_ of Mitchell.
By T. Gill. From Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, p. 695. [No. 883.] 1p.

---- Notes on the genus _Chonerhinus_ or _Xenopterus._ By T. Gill. From
Proceed. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp. 697-699. [No. 884.] 3pp.

---- On the genus _Gnathanacanthus_ of Bleeker. By T. Gill. From
Proceed. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp. 701-704. [No. 885.] 4pp.

---- Notes on the _Tetraodontoidea._ By T. Gill. From Proceed. U.S.
Nat. Mus. v. xiv, pp. 705-720. [No. 886.] Washington. 15pp., 1 pl.

---- Preliminary descriptions of 37 new species of hermit crabs of the
genus _Eupagurus_ in the U.S. Nat. Mus. By J. E. Benedict. From Proc.
    U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xv, pp. 1-26. [No. 887.] Washington, 1892. 26pp.

---- Description of two apparently new fly catchers from Costa Rica. By
G. K. Cherrie. From Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. v. xv, pp. 27-28. [No. 888.]
2pp.

---- Report upon the condition and progress of the U.S. Nat. Museum
during the year ending June 30, 1889. By G. B. Goode. From the report
of the Nat. Mus. 1888-'89, pp. 1-277. Washington, 1891. 277pp., 4 pls.
.75

---- List of institutions and foreign and domestic libraries to which
it is desired to send future publications of the Nat. Museum. From the
report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89, pp. 191-277. Washington, 1891.
89pp.

---- The museums of the future. By G. B. Goode. From the report of the
Nat. Museum, 1888-'89, pp. 427-445. Washington, 1891. 21pp.
                                                            .50

---- Te Pito te Henua, or Easter Island. By W. J. Thomson. From report
of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp. 447-552. Washington, 1891. 106pp. 49
pls.

---- Aboriginal skin dressing; a study based on material in the U.S.
Nat Mus. By O. T. Mason. From the report of the Nat. Mus. 1888-'89, pp.
553-589. Washington, 1891. 37pp., 33 pls.

---- The puma or American lion. (_Felis concolor_ of Linnæus.) By F. W.
True. From report of the Nat. Mus. for 1888-'89, pp. 591-608.
Washington, 1891. 18pp., 1 pl.

---- Animals recently extinct or threatened with extermination, as
represented in the collections of the U.S. Nat. Museum. By F. A. Lucas.
From report of the Nat. Mus. for 1888-'89, pp. 609-649. Washington,
1891. 41pp., 11 pls.

---- The development of the American rail and track, as illustrated by
the collection in the U.S. Nat. Museum. By J. E. Watkins. From report
of the Nat. Mus. 1888-'89, pp. 651-708. Washington, 1891. 59pp.

---- Explorations in Newfoundland and Labrador in 1887, made in
connection with the cruise of the U.S. Fish Commission schooner
_Grampus_. By F. A. Lucus. From report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89,
pp. 709-728. Washington, 1891. 21pp., 1 pl.

---- On the bronze buddha in the U.S. Nat. Museum. By C. DeKay. From
the report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89, pp. 729-735. Washington, 1891.
8pp., 1 pl.

---- Preliminary handbook of the department of geology of the U.S. Nat.
Museum. By G. P. Merrill. From report of the Nat. Museum, 1888-'89.
Appendix, pp. 1-50. Washington, 1891. 52pp.

---- Descriptive catalogue of the Abbott collection of ethnological
objects from Kilima-Njaro, East Africa; collected and presented to the
    U.S. Nat. Museum by Dr. W. L. Abbott. From report of the Nat. Mus. for
1891, pp. 1-50. Washington, 1892. 52pp.


UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY. Annual register, 1891-'92. [With
historical sketch.] Washington, 1891. 12^o. 96pp.


UNITED STATES NAVAL OBSERVATORY. Observations made during 1887. With
three appendices. Washington, 1892. 4^o. lxxxix+170+37+99+261pp., 10
pls.
                                                           3.00

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 11; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

APPENDICES.

1. Report upon some of the magnetic observatories of Europe. By C. C.
Marsh, U.S.N. 37pp., 6 pls.

2. Magnetic observations at the U.S. naval observatory, 1890. By J. A.
Hoogewerff, U.S.N. 99pp., 4 pls.

3. Meteorological observations and results at the U.S. naval
observatory, 1883-1887. [By J. R. Eastman.] 261pp.

---- Washington observations, 1888. Appendix 1. Observations of double
stars made at the U.S. Naval Observatory. Part 2d, 1880-1891. By Asaph
Hall, Washington, 1892. 4^o. 203pp.
                                                           1.00

_Note:_ Part 1 was published in 1881 as appendix vi to Washington
observations for 1877.

---- Report of the Superintendent for the year ending June 30, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 13pp.

---- Memorial from practical astronomers for a change of management of
the observatory. January 14, 1892. 8pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 40; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on naval affairs, adversely on bill
(H.R. 2996) providing for a change in the management of the naval
observatory. March 30, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 926; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA. Report from the committee on public lands
favoring bill (H.R. 3933) to set apart land for the use of the Lick
observatory, etc. February 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 253; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI. Report from the committee on military affairs
to accompany bill (S. 1762) for the relief of the University of
Missouri. January 21, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 93; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UNSELL, DAVID. Findings of the court of claims in the case of Unsell
_v._ U.S. January 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 38; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.


UPHAM, WARREN. Altitudes between Lake Superior and Rocky mountains.
Washington, 1891. 229pp.
                                                            .35

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 72.


UPTON, J. K. Finances of Maine. 4^o. 41pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 162.

---- Summary of national, state, and local indebtedness. 4^o. 4pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 176.

---- Assessed valuation of property, 1890. 4pp. 4^o.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 192.


UTAH. Report of the Governor of Utah to the Secretary of the Interior,
1891. Washington, 1891. 58pp.

---- Report on the Industrial Christian Home Association of Utah.
February 24, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 104; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report [4th] of the commissioner of schools, 1891. 16pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on territories [and views of the
minority] to accompany bill H.R. 7690, entitled A bill for the local
government of the territory of Utah, and to provide for the election of
certain officers in said territory. April 1, 1892. 28pp.
                                                            .15

    H.R. rep. no. 943; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


UTAH COMMISSION. Report to the Secretary of the Interior, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 36pp.


VAN FOSSEN, JOHN. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to remove charge of desertion against J. Van Fossen.
February 6, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 178; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


VARIGNY, HENRY DE. Temperature and life. From the Smithsonian report
for 1890. Washington, 1891. 24pp.
                                                            .02

    Smithsonian pub. no. 818.


VASEY, GEORGE. Monograph of the grasses of the United States and
British America. Washington, 1892. vi, 1-89, vii-xivpp.
                                                            .75

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Botany: Contributions to Nat. Herbarium, vol.
3, no. 1.


VENEZUELA STEAM TRANSPORTATION COMPANY. Message from the President of
the United States relative to the claim of the Venezuela Steam
Transportation Company. April 14, 1892. 105pp.
                                                            .40

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 79; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


VIOSCA, JAMES, _Consul._ Orchilla in Lower California. 2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 4-5.


VIVIAN, THOMAS J. Transportation by water in the United States. 4^o.
10pp.

    U.S. Census, 1890: Bulletin no. 179.


WADSWORTH, M. E. Michigan mining school, Houghton, Mich. Sketch. 8pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 4,
    1891, pp. 116-123.


WAITE, MERTON BENWAY. Description of two new species of _Peronospora._
5pp., 1 pl.

    Journal of mycology, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 105-109.


WALCOTT, CHARLES DOOLITTLE. Correlation papers. Cambrian. Washington,
1891. 447pp., 3 pls.
                                                            .50

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 81.

---- The fauna of the lower cambrian or olenellus zone. 252pp., 56 pls.

    U.S. Geol. Survey, Tenth annual report, 1888-'89, pp. 509-760.


WALLACE, GEORGE H., _Consul-General._ Superphosphates in Australia.
8pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 529-536.

---- Australian wool season of 1891-'92. 5pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 130-134.


WALSTON, LOUISE. Historical sketch of Smith college. 4pp., 3 pls.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 6,
    1891, pp. 442-445.


WAMER, WILLIAM D., _Consul._ The beat-sugar industry of Germany. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 137, pp. 208-213.


WAR CLAIMS. Report from the committee on war claims favoring bill (H.R.
639) to authorize the Secretary of War to investigate and provide for
all claims for the use of church and school buildings for Government
purposes during the late war. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 11; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Louisa Q. Lovell. February
4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 12; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Samuel Howard. February 4,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 13; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Andrew J. Duncan. February
4, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 16; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Stephen Moore, admr. of W.
Hopper. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 17; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Cumberland Female college
of McMinnville, Tenn. February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 18; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Herain Johnson. February
4, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 19; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of book agents of the
Methodist Episcopal church, south. February 4, 1892. 40pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 20; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of heirs of H. Cothes. (For
stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 26; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of estate of D. B. Sanders.
(For stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 27; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of widow of J. W. Leftwich.
(For stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 28; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lagrange Synodical
college. (For property destroyed.) February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 29; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Same. Favoring bill for the relief of P. C. Montgomery. (For
steamer.) February 4, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 30; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Alex'r Moffitt. (For
property destroyed.) February 4, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 31; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of legatees of Mark Davis.
(For property destroyed.) February 4, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 33; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Anthony Koons. (For a
horse.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 34; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of estate of F. M. Murray.
(For coal.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 35; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. W. Hildreth. (For
stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 36; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same. Favoring bill for the relief of H. M. Henson. (For pipe
stav_es.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 42; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Henry Ware. (For cotton.)
February 4, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 44; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. H. Crider. (For a
horse.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 37; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for allowance of certain claims reported by
the accounting officers of the Treasury under act of July 4, 1864.
February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 38; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. Filhoil _et al._(For
stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 45; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mobile Marine Dock
Company. (For use of dock.) February 4, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 46; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of B. & G. Cazes. (For
cotton.) February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. H. Stovall and W.
Hughes. (For pipe staves.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 48; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Allard and Crozier. (For
stores.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 49; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

----_ Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. P. Chouteau. (For
construction of light-draft monitors.) February 4, 1892. 9pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 50; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mary H. S. Robertson. (For
rent.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 51; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. A. Hall. (For
commissions on sales.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 52; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Warren Hall. (For cotton.)
February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 53; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Eliza E. Hebert. (For
stores.) February 4, 1892. 15pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 54; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Anna C. Livingston. (For
use of property.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 68; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for relief of heirs of Wm. Pitcher and A.
Hayford and or's. February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 69; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for relief of the owners of brig _Abby
Ellen_. (For loss of brig.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 70; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for relief of Jane L. Taylor. (For rails and
lumber.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 74; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Payne, James & Co. (For
use of storehouse.) February 5, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 75; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for relief of the representatives of R. R.
Vandiver. (For a horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 76; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. A. Lynch. (For
services.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 71; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. D. Matthews. (For pay
and emolument.) February 5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 72; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. E. Morgan. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 77; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mrs. C. N. Graves. (For
damages to property.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 78; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Susannah P. Swoope. (For
destruction of house.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 80; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Randolph Wesson. (For a
mule.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 81; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Henry S. French. (For
cotton.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 82; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Odon Deucatte. (For
cotton.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 83; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mrs. A. Shirley. For
supplies.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 84; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. W. and M. H. Glassie
and J. C. Nash. (For wood.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 85; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Union National Bank of
New Orleans. (For seizure of deposits.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 86; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Valentine Sauppe. (For
supplies.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 88; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Margaret Kennedy. (For
timber, etc.) February 6, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 95; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. F. Kolbe. (Expenses of
recruiting.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 96; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the heirs of W. D. Wilson.
(For rent.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 102; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. H. Jones and T. D.
Harris. (For use of rolling mill.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 103; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Sarah G. Smith, executrix
of F. L. Smith. (For use of ground.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 110; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Nemiah Garrison, assignee
of Moses Perkins. (For timber.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 111; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. L. H. Crenshaw. (For
mules.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 112; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. B. Webster. (For
services prior to muster.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 113; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. S. Havens. (For pay and
allowance.) February 5, 1892. 11pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 114; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. O. Donnell. February 5,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 115; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. Galland. (For money
expended in raising troops.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 116; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of certain persons in Nevada.
(For money and services in repelling invasions.) February 5, 1892.
12pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 117; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of heirs of Miguel Salinas.
(For occupancy of plantation.) February 5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 123; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. F. Brott. (For cotton.)
February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 124; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of heirs of S. T. Austin.
(For cotton.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 125; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. McNairy, executor of A.
C. Thomson. (For coffins.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 126; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief J. H. Bugg. (For services
prior to muster.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 127; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief A. W. Pollard. (For services
prior to muster.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 128; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. B. Ennis. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 129; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. C. M. Travis. (For
supplies.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 130; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. F. Crider. (Expenses of
recruiting.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 131; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Sarah K. T. Baker. (For
rent of estate.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 132; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of heirs of Catherine Morin.
(For occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 133; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Samuel Fels. (For seized
tobacco.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 134; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. S. Frizell. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 135; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of James Bishop. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. N. Dorr. (For a horse.)
February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 137; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Matilda Cook. (For a
mule.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 138; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. G. Groom. (For stores.)
February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 139; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. D. and A. S. Frobel.
(For occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 140; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Andrea Lutz. (For
recruiting expenses.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 141; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. C. Rudd. (For
occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 142; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Ann E. Heiskell. (For
stores.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 143; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of John Rhodes and wife. (For
stores.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 144; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. S. Sammis. (For
occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 145; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. D. Thorne. (For
cotton.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 146; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Sally S. Tate. (For
cotton.) February 5, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 147; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. B. McClintock. (For
horse.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 148; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Julia A. Humphries. (For
occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 149; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. H. Mastin. (For
occupancy.) February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 150; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Samuel Marsh. (For
supplies.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 151; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Jane Linn. (For a horse.)
February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 152; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of estate of M. L. Broadwell.
(For horses.)  February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 153; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Merritt Rose. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 154; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. H. Vaughan. (For a
horse.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 155; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. A. Gregory. (For 10
mules.) February 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 156; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. V. Stirman. (For
horses.) February 5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 157; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to amend the record of Alvis Beshears.
February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 158; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to pay Pennsylvania damages sustained from
troops during the war. February 5, 1892. 14pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 166; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to indemnify Pennsylvania for money expended
in 1864 for militia. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 167; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. E. Woodbridge. (For use
of invention.) February 6, 1892. 10pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 177; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for relief of St. Joseph's Catholic church
at Martinsburg, W. Va. (For occupancy.) February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 211; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of German Evangelical church
of Martinsburg, W. Va. (Destruction of property.) February 8, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 212; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Methodist Episcopal
church of Martinsburg, W. Va. (For occupancy.) February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 213; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. M. Shaffer. (For
occupancy.) February 8, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 214; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. H. Strickland. (For pay
and allowances.) February 8, 1892. 9pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 217; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to examine and settle accounts of certain
states and the city of Baltimore for moneys expended for military
purposes during the war of 1812. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 220; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. J. Worcester. (For rank
and pay.) February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 226; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of N. B. Giddings. (For
seized gunpowder.) February 8, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 227; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. F. Gibson. (For
stores.) February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 238; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of F. A. Bliss. (For property
destroyed.) February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 239; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Emma C. Lovelace and S. D.
Clark. (For live stock.) February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 241; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the settlement of claims of officers and
crews of the Navy to certain moieties. February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 242; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the estate of F. H.
Nichols. (For stores.) February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 243; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of B. F. Rogers. (For
stores.) February 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 244; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to reimburse California, Oregon and Nevada
for moneys expended in the suppression of the rebellion. February 10,
1892. 45pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 254; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. B. Payne. (For
supplies.) February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 259; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of executors of L. R.
Marshall. (For supplies.) February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 260; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Rachel Dyer. (For
supplies.) February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 262; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Alex. Stoddart. (For
cotton.) February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 261; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Methodist church of
Huntsville, Ala. (For occupancy.) February 10, 1892. 5pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 264; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Robert Spaugh. (For
confiscated note.) February 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 265; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. M. Clapp. February 10,
1892, 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 268; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Sarah A. Clapp. (For
services as surgeon.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 274; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. L. Higgins. (For
supplies.) February 11, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 275; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Catherine Caine. February
11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 276; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. F. Smith, admr. of D.
Smith. (For stores.) February 11, 1895. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 277; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Enoch Davis. (For balance
of bounty.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 278; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of B. F. Moody & Co. (For
balance on contract.) February 11, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 279; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. R. Wyrick. (For a
mule.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

H. R rep. no. 280; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. S. Lee. (For rent.)
February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 281; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. B. Morrow. (For
stores.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 282; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. J. Ockerson. (For
travel pay.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 283; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. J. Aldrich. (For
cotton.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 284; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mary E. Atkinson. (For
occupancy.) February 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 285; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Robert Travilla. February
11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 286; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lucy A. and A. G. Lee.
(For supplies.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 287; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of James Regan. February 11,
1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 288; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. J. Alexander. (For pay
for services.) February 11, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 289; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Battelle and Evans. (For
supplies.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 290; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the catholic church at
Dalton, Ga. (For occupancy.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 291; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the first Baptist church
of Cartersville, Ga. (For property destroyed.) February 11, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 292; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. S. Saunders. (For
stores.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 300; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. M. Nalley. (For
stores.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 302; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Emeline E. Musgrave. (For
nursing her stepsons.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 303; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Hiram Somerville. (For
supplies.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 304; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. A. Spaulding, admr. of
S. Blue. (For cattle.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 305; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Fannie Pemberton. (For a
boat.) February 12, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 306; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to refer the claim of the Cumberland
Presbyterian church of Athens, Ala. (for occupancy) to the court of
claims. February 13, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 310; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Presbyterian church of
Bethel Springs, Tenn. (For occupancy.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 311; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. B. Bazell. (For
expenses of recruiting.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 312; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Col. S. K. N. Patton. (For
pay and allowance.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 313; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. D. O'Brien. (For
supplies.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 314; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. P. Hartman. (For
services.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 315; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of George Turner. (For
services as scout.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep., no. 316; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Nelson McLaughlin.
(Expenses of recruiting.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 317; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. S. Johnson. (For
stores.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 318; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. M. Henry. (For
services.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 319; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. L. Bradley. (For
property destroyed.) February 13, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 320; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of B. R. Hackney. (For
stores.) February 13, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 321; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. H. Hoffman. (For
property burned.) February 13, 1892. 12pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 322; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lydia A. Magill adm'r.
(For cattle.) February 13, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 323; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. B. Beard, and o'rs. (To
court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 327; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. B. Carter. (To court of
claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 328; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. Donats, and o'rs. (To
court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 329; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. Moore, and o'rs. (To
court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 330; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Overton Hotel Company,
of Memphis, Tenn. (To court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 331; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of O. F. Montgomery, and
o'rs. (To court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 332; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. L. McLemore. (To court
of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 333; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to authorize the court of claims to hear and
determine the claim of the Citizens' Bank, of Louisiana. February 15,
1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 340; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Mobile and Girard
Railroad company. (For services.) February 15, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 341; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of N. J. Bigley. (For
supplies.) February 15, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 343; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. W. Schaumburg. (For pay
and allowance.) February 15, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 344; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Hamilton Crews. (For
property destroyed.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 345; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mrs. C. B. Meeha. (To
court of claims.) February 15, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 346; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. H. Adams. February 16,
1892. 8pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 349; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the surviving partners of
J. & O. P. Cobb & Co., and o'rs. (To court of claims.) February 16,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 350; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of O. P. Cobb, and or's. (To
court of claims.) February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 351; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. L. Rhea. (For cotton.)
February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 358; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Francis Millet. (For
supplies.) February 16, 1892; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    H.R. rep. no. 359; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the crew of the _Wyoming_.
(For bounty.) February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 360; 52d Cong., 1st sess.




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.

MONTHLY CATALOGUE.

JOHN H. HICKCOX,        Editor.

VOL. VIII.    WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY, 1892.    No. 7.

Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Washington, D.C.\

CATALOGUE.

JULY, 1892.


WAR CLAIMS. _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William Kendall.
(For sutlers' supplies.) February 16, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 361; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of certain citizens of
Jefferson county, Ky. (Damages to property.) February 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 374; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Same. Favoring bill for the relief of G. D. Hamilton.
(Compensation for services.) February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 375; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. Grivot. (Money taken
from Louisiana State Bank by military order.) February 16, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no 376; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of James S. Clark. (For
cotton.) February 16, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 377; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of O. P. Phillips. (For
forage.) February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 388; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. Antisell. (For timber.)
February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 389; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. S. Brantly. (For
stores.) February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 390; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. B. Cunningham. (For
cotton.) February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 391; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. Dickson and o'rs. (For
rent.) February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 392; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of L. D. Sugg. (For stores.)
February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 393; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. Poland. (For stores.)
February 17, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 394; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. Large. (For horse, &c.)
February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 395; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. M. Matheny. (For pay as
scout.) February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 396; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. A. Urquhart. (For
occupancy.) February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 397; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. Gomez. (For loss on
patents.) February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 398; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. M. Pritchard. February
17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 399; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mrs. A. A. H. Richards.
(For destruction of property.) February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 400; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. H. Huson. (For stores.)
February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 401; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Odd Fellows' Hall
Assoc. of New Orleans. February 17, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 402; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Gerard Wood. (Surgeon's
pay.) February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 404; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of creditors of the Bank of
Louisiana. (For money seized.) February 17, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 403; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D.C. Isgrig. (For a
horse.) February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 412; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for a commission to ascertain facts
concerning property taken at Cynthiana, Ky. February 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 413; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. P. Poullain. (For
cotton.) February 19, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 417; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of James Sims. (For stores.)
February 19, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 418; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. J. McConnell. (For
horses.) February 19, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 419; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. Dittlinger. (For
property seized.) February 24, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 429; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. W. Handlin. (For salary
as judge.) February 24, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 431; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. W. Webb. (For
restoration and retirement.) February 26, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 451; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. H. Montgomery. (For
relief from judgment.) February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 461; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the trustees of the
Methodist Episcopal Church of Martinsburg, W. Va. (For occupancy.)
February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 465; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of St. Joseph's Catholic
Church of Martinsburg, W. Va. (For occupancy.) February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 467; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to refund W. Virginia the money paid for
services during the rebellion. February 26, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 468; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of L. W. Washington. (For
stores.) February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 469; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. S. Wilcoxen. (For
substitute furnished.) February 27, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 475; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lester Noble. (For
occupancy, &c.) February 27, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 480; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to facilitate the settlement of claims for
arrears of pay and bounty. February 29, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 484; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the First Methodist church
of Jackson, Tenn. (For occupancy.) February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 15; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. G. W. Brooks. (Forfeit
of a bond.) February 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 32; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Cummings, Doyle & Co. (For
occupancy.) February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 39; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. H. Hughes, _admr._ of
D. Unsell. (For a ferry boat.) February 1, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 43; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William Bushby. (For board
of prisoners.) February 5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 67; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the representatives of H.
W. Archer. (For supplies.) February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 79; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of St. Charles College. (For
occupancy.) February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 215; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. L. Cousens. (For
property seized.) February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 216; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of John Sullivan. (For prize
money.) February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 218; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. P. Alsbury. (For
property destroyed.) February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 219; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. S. Neet, Jr. (Horse
claim.) February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 225; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. W. Carmack. (For pay
and allowances.) February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 228; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Alfred Smith. (For a
mule.) February 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 240; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. Burke, admr. of P.
Kelly. (For supplies.) February 15, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 334; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. W. Parish. (For ice
furnished hospitals.) February 24, 1892. 22pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 430; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. W. Boutwell. (For
services as scout.) February 25, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 433; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Soloman Lusk. (For
property destroyed.) February 25, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 434; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. S. Priest. (For special
service.) February 25, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 435; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of First Michigan cavalry.
(For expenses.) February 25, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 436; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the heirs of Edmund Wolf.
(For foundry and fixtures destroyed.) February 25, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 438; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief Mount Zion Society. (For use
and occupancy.) February 25, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 439; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. H. Wyatt. (For
medicines, etc.) February 26, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 457; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. P. Ward. (For stores.)
February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 458; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. F. Wilson. (For use and
occupancy.) February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 462; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the estate of A. H. Herr.
(For use and occupancy.) February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 463; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. M. Shaffer. (For use
and occupancy.) February 26, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 464; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. C. McCool. (For
services.)  February 26, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 466; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Charles Marklein. (For
goods seized.) February 26, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep no. 470; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of F. S. Whitney. (For
supplies.) March 2, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 509; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Same. Favoring bill for the relief of Frederick, Md. (Refund of
ransom levied.) March 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 520; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of George Denny, Sr. (For
corn.) March 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 522; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. M. Newman. (For
supplies.) March 3, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 524; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Z. Turner. (For stores.)
March 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 534; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. T. Bruen. (For
services.) March 4, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 535; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. S. Cameron. (For fuel.)
March 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 550; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of A. S. Core. (Settlement of
his accounts as collector of revenue.) March 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 551; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill (H.R. 5452) to settle and adjust the claims
of any State for defence of the U.S. March 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 552; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Levi Starn. March 7, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 553; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Cyrus Martin. March 7,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 554; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to reimburse the several States for interest
on moneys expended in raising troops. March 7, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 555; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. Worthington. (For
steamboat.) March 7, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 556; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of I. H. Wheat. (For a
horse.) March 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 560; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. W. White. March 8,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 561; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William and Mary College.
(For destruction of property.) March 9, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 562; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. and H. Short. (For
supplies.) March 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 563; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Adversely on bill for the relief of J. W. Eppes. (For
stores and supplies.) March 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 564; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the sureties of D. Murphy.
March 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 575; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief E. Cahalan. (For use of
steamboat.) March 9, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 576; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bills for the relief of S. F. Engs and A. M.
Randolph, _et al_. March 9, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 596; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Dr. Nathan Fletcher. (For
cotton.) March 9, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 600; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Florence Masonic Lodge,
Ala. (For building destroyed.) March 9, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 601; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to reimburse Kansas for moneys expended.
March 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 602; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. W. Shacklett. (For
stores.) March 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 604; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. M. Higgins. (For
stores.) March 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 605; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. K. Kirchner. (For stock
of goods destroyed.) March 10, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 606; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of E. A. Buder. (For goods
seized.) March 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 607; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. Herberer. (For
services.) March 10, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 608; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. P. Randolph. (For
supplies.)  March 10, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 609; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of H. P. Carson. (Pay as
scout.) March 10, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 611; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. F. Jocknick. March 10,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 612; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. L. Peters. (For musical
instruments.) March 10, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 613; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Adversely on bill for the relief of S. G. Mitchell and E.
J. Mahon. (For cotton.) March 11, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 652; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Sarah Grisson. March 12,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 653; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. A. Field. March 12,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 654; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. A. Danolds. (For care
of horses.) March 12, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 655; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. A. Swart. (For
supplies.) March 12, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 656; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of James Miller. (For
supplies.) March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 662; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of L. D. Allen. (For property
seized.) March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 669; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Jackson Briscoe. (Horse
claim.) March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 670; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of L. D. Allen. (For stores.)
March 14, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 671; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. E. Simerley. March 14,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 672; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William Wolfe. (For loss
of schooner.) March 14, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 682; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. L. Young. (For
services.) March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 684; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill to settle claims of Missouri militia
organizations. March 14, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 695; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Berks Co., Pa.,
    Agricultural Society. (For use of buildings.) March 14, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 698; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. F. Rowland. (Loss on
contract.) March 15, 1892. 21pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 709; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of John Roach. (Balance due
on _Dolphin_.) March 15, 1892. 16pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 710; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Atlantic Works, Boston.
(Loss on contract.) March 15, 1892. 6pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 711; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Charles Gallagher. (Loss
of vessel and cargo.) March 15, 1892. 5+1p.

    H.R. reps. nos. 712 and 713; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. R. Hathaway. March 16,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 721; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. H. Jones and T. D.
Harris. (For property seized.) March 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 722; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William Clift. (For wood.)
March 16, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 723; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of V. Hernandez. (For
transportation.) March 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 745; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Hagerstown, Md. (Refund of
ransom.) March 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 746; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Middletown, Md. (Refund of
ransom.) March 16, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 747; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of William Doyle and Hudson
Cooper. (For logs seized.) March 18, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 776; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the owners of Columbia
bridge, Penn. (Bridge destroyed.) March 19, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 777; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. K. Ponder. (For
supplies.) March 19, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 778; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. L. Walls. (For
supplies.) March 19, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 780; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. T. Hundley. March 19,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 782; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Daniel McLeod. (For loss
on contract.) March 21, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 797; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the William Boardman. (For
loss on contract) March 31, 1892. 8pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 798; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Carr, Rogers & Co. March
23, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 814; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Benjamin Wilkes. March 23,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 815; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Methodist church of
Point Pleasant, W. Va. (For occupancy.)  March 23, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 827; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Thomas Moonlight. (For
services.) March 25, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 828; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mrs. W. H. Scanlan. March
23, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 830; 52d Cong., 1st sess/.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. F. Alsup. (For
services.) March 24, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 848;. 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of T. O. Harter. (For
services.) March 24, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 849; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of S. M. Honeycutt. (For
services.) March 24, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 850; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. Keating. March 26 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 879; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Little Rock and Memphis R.
R. Co. (For iron.) March 28, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 885; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Laura E. Maddox. (For
tobacco seized.) March 28, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 886; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Dabney Walker. (For
services.) March 28, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 887; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. and E. S. Cameron. (For
fuel.) March 28, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 888; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of R. and A. E. Johnson. (For
tobacco seized.) March 28, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 890; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Roman Catholic church,
Jackson, Miss. (For property destroyed.) March 28, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 903; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of G. M. Hazen and o'rs. (For
rent.) March 31, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 934; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of D. Dickson and o'rs. (For
rent.) March 31, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 935; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of M. V. Maddox. April 4,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 970; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. T. Brown. (For
services.) April 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 971; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of J. A. Bates. (For cotton.)
April 4, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 972; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. R. Sautter. April 5,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 980; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

----  _Same._ Adversely on bill for the relief of John Reilly. April 5,
1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 995; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lewis Thompson. April 6,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 997; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. V. Neidlinger. (For
supplies.) April 6, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1007; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Lewis Deems. April 6,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1008; 52d Cong., 1st sess/.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of W. A. Quarles. (For
supplies.) April 6, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1009; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of F. A. Brown. April 6,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1010; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Z. J. White. April 7,
1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1011; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of C. C. Taggart. (For a
substitute.) April 7, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1012; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of Mary Barron (For prize
money.) April 7, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1017; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of loyal citizens of Loudoun
Co., Va. (Property destroyed.) April 7, 1892. 7pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1018; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- _Same._ Favoring bill for the relief of the Christian church of
Savannah, Mo. (For occupancy.) April 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 1030; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WAR DEPARTMENT. Annual report of the Secretary of War, 1891.
Washington, 1891. 26pp.
                                                              .10

---- Report of the Secretary of War; being part of the message and
documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. In five volumes. vol. 1.
Washington, 1892. 908pp., 3 maps, 11 pls.
                                                             1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 1; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Annual reports of the military departments, 1891.

---- Report of the Secretary of War; being part of the message and
documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. In five volumes. vol. 2 in 6
parts. Washington, 1891.
                                                           1.00

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 2; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Report of the Chief of Engineers, 1891. 6 vols.

---- Report of the Secretary of War; being part of the message and
documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. In five volumes. vol 3.
Washington, 1892. 758pp., 73 pls.
                                                             1.25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 3; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Report of the chief of ordinance, 1891.

---- Report of the Secretary of War; being part of the message and
documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. In five volumes. vol. iv.
Washington, 1892. 781pp., 27 charts, 10 pls.
                                                             1.25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Report of the Chief Signal officer, 1891.

---- Report of the Secretary of War; being part of the message and
documents, 1st session, 52d Congress. In five vols. vol. 5. Washington,
1892. 578pp., 7 fol. l.
                                                             1.25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    CONTENTS.

    Reports of the inspector-general of the army.

---- Light artillery drill regulations, United States army. Adopted
October 3, 1891. Washington, 1891. 567pp., sq. 12^o.
                                                           1.50

---- Infantry drill regulations, United States army. Adopted October 3,
1891. Washington, 1891. 353pp. sq. 12^o.
                                                           1.00

---- Cavalry drill regulations, United States army. Adopted October 3,
1891. Washington, 1891. 534pp. sq. 12^o.
                                                           1.75

---- Alphabetical list of additions made to the War Department library
from June, 1884, to June, 1891. Washington, 1891. 114pp.
                                                           2.00

---- Register of the War Department, January 1, 1892. Washington, 1892.
219pp.
                                                            .75

---- Supplemental estimates submitted by the Secretary of War for
1892-93. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 81; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill
authorizing the Secretary of War to lease certain public property.
February 8, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 171; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of an appropriation for the purchase of machine guns of
small-arms caliber for the fiscal year 1892-93. February 12, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 129; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Communication from the Secretary of War requesting authority to
relieve certain officers of the pay department of the army of checkages
against their accounts. February 18, 1892. 15pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 135; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimate of deficiency in appropriation for printing and binding
for the War Department for 1891-'92. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of War requesting that the War
Department library be designated as a depository for government
publications. March 24, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 171; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- List of employés in the Department who are not employed as
laborers, nor as members of the classified civil service, and who are
not specifically authorized by law. April 21, 1892. 8pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 82; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the adjutant-general representing the necessity for
additional room for the division of military information. May 4, 1892.
4pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 221; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Adjutant-General. Annual report of the adjutant-general, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 18pp.
                                                            .10

---- ---- Official army register for January, 1892. Washington, 1892.
425pp.
                                                           1.00

---- ---- Compendium of general orders from the adjutant-general's
office amending army regulations, 1892. Washington, 1892. 171pp., 12^o.

---- ---- The resistance of guns to tangential rupture. Washington,
1892. 4^o. 72pp.
                                                            .75

---- Board of Ordnance and Fortifications. Report of the board. January
5, 1892. Washington, 1892. 112pp., 8 pls.
                                                            .50

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 12; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Report from the committee on printing favoring resolution to
print 500 additional copies of the report of the board of ordnance and
fortifications. May 17, 1892. 1p. Sen. rep. no. 687; 52d Cong., 1st
sess.

---- Commissary-General. Annual report of the commissary-general of
subsistence, 1891. Washington, 1892. 14pp.

---- Engineers. Annual report of the chief of engineers, 1891. [Without
appendices.] Washington, 1891. xxiii, 1-514pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Annual report of the chief of engineers, 1891. [With
appendices.] 6 vols. Washington, 1891.
                                                           5.00

---- ---- Statement showing the names, etc., of each civilian engineer
employed from July, 1890, to June 30, 1891, in the work of improving
rivers and harbors. 9pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 75; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Inspector-General. Annual report of the inspector-general to the
major-general commanding the army for the year 1891. Washington, 1891.
91pp., 1 fol. l.
                                                            .25

---- ---- Annual report of the inspector-general to the Secretary of
War, for the year 1891. Washington, 1891. 34pp.
                                                            .15

---- ---- Report of the inspector-general of the army to the
major-general commanding the army. 1891. (2) Report of the
inspector-general of the army to the secretary of war. 1891. (3) Report
of an inspection of the soldiers' home. Washington, 1892. 578pp., 7
fol. l.
                                                           1.25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the inspector-general in reference to clothing
allowance for ordnance-sergeants. January 5, 1892. 4pp. H.R. ex. doc.
no. 48; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Judge-Advocate-General. Annual report of the acting
judge-advocate-general. 1891. Washington, 1892. 21pp.
                                                            .10

---- Major-General. Report of the Major-General commanding the army,
1891. Washington, 1891. 225pp, 3 maps.
                                                            .50

---- Ordnance Officer. Annual report of the chief of ordnance, 1891.
Washington, 1892. 758pp., 73 pls.
                                                           1.25

---- ---- Report of the chief of ordnance showing the cost of type guns
and other guns. January 5, 1892. 2pp. H.R. ex. doc. no. 13; 52d Cong.,
1st sess.

---- ---- Letter from the chief of ordnance in regard to the
disposition of obsolete and unserviceable arms, etc. March 26, 1892.
3pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 174; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Notes on the construction of ordnance. No. 57. January 12,
1891. Design for an experimental carriage for a 7-inch b. l. siege
howitzer. By Capt. William Crozier. 4^o. 24pp., 1 pl.
                                                            .50

---- ---- _Same._ No. 58. June 19, 1891. Effects of fire on gun
carriages. By E. Muzeau. Translated by Lieut. F. P. Peck, ordnance
dept. 4^o. 70pp.
                                                            .75

---- ---- _Same._ No. 59. July 23, 1891. The resistance and shrinkages
of built up cannon, with application to United States army ordnance.
Supplementary to Notes on the construction of ordnance no. 35. By Capt.
R. Birnie. 4^o. 48pp., 8 pls.
                                                            .75

---- Paymaster-General. Annual report of the paymaster-general of the
army. 1891. Washington. 24pp.
                                                            .10

---- Quartermaster-General. Annual report of the quartermaster-general,
1891. Washington, 1892. 218pp.
                                                           1.00

---- Signal Office. Annual report of the chief signal officer to the
Secretary of War for the year 1891. Washington, 1891. 34pp.

---- ---- Annual report of the chief signal officer for the year ending
June 30, 1891. Washington, 1892. 781pp., 27 charts, 11 pls.
                                                           1.25

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 1, part 2, v. 4; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

    APPENDICES.

    No. 1. Report of the officer in charge of the division of military
    signaling. 7p.

    No. 2. Report of the officer in charge of telegraph division. 6pp.

    No. 3. Report of the officer in charge of the verification of
    official forecasts. 10pp.

    No. 4. Report of forecasts of cold waves. 5pp.

    No. 5. Report of the professor in charge of the river and flood
    division. 194pp., 1 chart. [This appendix contains "Practical rules
    for prediction of flood stages of rivers."]

    No. 6. Report of officer in charge of State weather services. 32pp.

    No. 7. Report of the officer in charge of the stations division.
    24pp.

    No. 8. Annual report of data division. 24pp., 2 pls.

    No. 9. Farewell order of the chief signal officer, June 30, 1891.
    2pp.

    No. 10. Report of assistant professor in charge of the instrument
    division. 44pp., 8 pls., 1 chart.

    No. 11. Report of bibliographer and librarian. 24pp. [Includes a
    list of publications of the U.S. Signal Service from 1861 to July
    1, 1891.]

    No. 12. Report of supply and miscellaneous division. 22pp.

    No. 13. Changes in signal service stations, and annual
    meteorological summaries for 1890. 101pp.

    No. 14. Temperature data, 1890, from signal service and voluntary
    observers. 133pp.

    No. 15. Precipitation data, 1890, from signal service and voluntary
    observers. 67pp.

    No. 16. Dates of the first and last killing frosts for the season
    1890-'91. 10pp.

    No. 17. International pressure and storm charts. By A. W. Greely.
    31pp., 25 charts.

---- ---- Charts showing "average monthly cloudiness" in the United
States. Prepared under direction of A. W. Greely, chief signal officer.
Washington, 1891. 12 charts, folio.

---- ---- Charts showing "isobars, isotherms, and winds" in the United
States for each month from January, 1871, to December, 1873. Prepared
under direction of A. W. Greely, chief signal officer. Washington,
1891. 36 charts, 4^o.

---- ---- Charts showing the "probability of rainy days," prepared from
observations of eighteen years. Prepared under the direction of A. W.
Greely, chief signal officer. Washington, 1891. 12 charts, folio.

---- ---- Diurnal fluctuations of atmospheric pressure at twenty-nine
selected stations in the United States. By A. W. Greely, chief signal
officer. Washington, 1891. v+15pp., 4^o.

---- ---- International monthly charts of mean pressures and wind
directions at 7 a. m., Washington mean time, for 1882 and 1883.
Prepared under direction of A. W. Greely, chief signal officer.
Washington, 1891. 24 charts, folio.

---- ---- Mean temperature and their corrections in the United States.
Prepared under direction of A. W. Greely, chief signal officer, by A.
McAdie. Washington, 1891. x+45pp., 4^o.

---- ---- Letter from the Secretary of war transmitting a report of the
chief signal officer of the army on the climatic conditions of the
state of Texas. Washington, 1892. 4^o. 120pp., 23 charts.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 5; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- ---- Normal temperature charts by decades for the United States
and the Dominion of Canada. Prepared under direction of A. W. Greely,
chief signal officer. Washington, 1891. 72 charts, folio.

---- ---- Charts showing average velocity and direction of the wind,
prepared from observations for seventeen years. [Washington, 1891.] 36
charts, folio.

---- ---- Charts showing maximum and minimum temperatures by decades
for all years. [Washington, 1891.] 37 charts, folio.

---- ---- Summaries of international meteorological observations.
January to June, 1889. Washington, June, 1891. [Discontinued.]

---- ---- Instructions for the use of the rain gauge. Washington, 1891.
7pp.

---- ---- Index of meteorological observations in the United States.
Compiled in records division under direction of A. W. Greely, chief
signal officer. Washington, 1891. 305pp. 4^o. _milliograph_.

---- ---- Extracts from the U.S. statutes at large affecting the signal
corps of the army. (December, 1887, to March, 1891.) Washington, 1891.
28pp.

---- ---- Special orders. 1888-'91. Washington. 4^o.

---- ---- General orders. 1867-'91. Washington. 12^o.

---- ---- Circulars. 1872-'91. Washington. 12^o.

---- ---- Publications of the U.S. Signal Service from 1861 to July 1,
1891. 21pp.

    War Dep't, Signal office: Annual report 1891, appendix no. 11.

---- Surgeon-General. Annual report of the surgeon-general of the army,
1891. Washington, 1891. 146pp.
                                                            .50

---- ---- Communication relative to bookbinding for the library of the
surgeon-general's office. March 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 155; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WARINGTON, ROBERT. Six lectures on the investigations at Rothamsted
experimental station delivered under the provisions of the Lawes
agricultural trust. Washington, 1892. 113pp., 11 pls.
                                                            .75

    Agr'l Dep't, Office of Experiment stations: Bulletin no. 8.


WAR OF THE REBELLION. A compilation of the official records of the
union and confederate armies. Published under the direction of the
Secretary of War. Series 1, vol. 34 in 4 parts. Part 1, reports. Parts
2, 3, 4, correspondence. Washington, 1891. 4 vols.
                                                           3.00

    CONTENTS.

    Chapter xlvi. Operations in Louisiana and trans-Mississippi and
    territories. January 1-June 30, 1864.

---- _Same._ Series 1, vol. 35 in 2 parts. Part 1, reports,
correspondence, etc. Part 2, correspondence. Washington, 1891. 2 vols.
                                                             1.50

    CONTENTS.

    Chapter xlvii. Operations in South Carolina and Florida, and on the
    Georgia coast. January 1-November 13, 1864.

---- _Same._ Series 1, vol. 36, in 3 parts. Part 1, reports. Part 2,
correspondence. Washington, 1891. 3 vols.
                                                             2.50

    CONTENTS.

    Chapter xlviii. Operations in southeastern Virginia and in North
    Carolina. May 1-June 12, 1864.

---- _Same._ Series 1, vol. 37, in 2 parts. Part 1, reports,
correspondence, etc. Part 2, correspondence. Washington, 1891. 2 vols.
                                                             1.50


    CONTENTS.

    Chapter xlix. Operations in northern Virginia, Maryland, and
    Pennsylvania. May 1-August 3, 1864.

---- _Same._ Series 1, vol. 38, in 5 parts. Parts 1-3, reports. Parts
4-5, correspondence, etc. Washington, 1892. 2 vols.
                                                           3.75

    CONTENTS.

    Chapter 1. The Atlanta, Ga., campaign. May 1-September 8, 1864.

---- _Same._ Series 1, vol. 39, in 2 parts. Part 1, reports. Part 2,
correspondence, etc. Washington, 1892. 2 vols.
                                                           1.50

    CONTENTS.

    Chapter li. Operations in Kentucky, southwest Virginia, Tennessee,
    Mississippi, Alabama, and north Georgia (the Atlanta campaign
    excepted). May 1-November 13,1864.

---- _Same._ Atlas to accompany the official records of the union and
confederate armies. Compiled by Capt. Calvin D. Cowles. Parts 1-4.
Washington, 1891-'92, folio.
                                                             1.60

_Note:_ This atlas is issued in parts of five plates each.

---- Estimate of an appropriation for battle lines, and sites for
tablets at Antietam. February 27, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 146; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WARFIELD, E. D. Miami University. Sketch. 6pp., 1 pl.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 30-35.


WARREN, JOHN. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill for the relief of John Warren. (To amend record.) March 1, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 496; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WASHBURN, ALBERT H. Beet culture in Germany. 10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 104-113.

---- German cereal and live-stock statistics. 1889 and 1890. 3pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 121-123.

---- Fishery legislation in Germany. 4pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 553-556.


WASHINGTON. Report from the committee on public lands favoring bill
granting lands to the State of Washington for a fish hatchery. January
18, 1892. 1p.

    Sen. rep. no. 40; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Memorial of the legislature favoring an appropriation for the
construction of a ship canal from Salmon bay, on Puget sound, to Lake
Union, etc. March 3, 1892, 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 88; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WASHINGTON, LEWIS W. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill
for the relief of L. W. Washington. (For stores.) January 25, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 98; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WATERWAY. Report from the committee on interstate and foreign commerce
favoring joint resolution to promote the improvement of the waterway
from the head of Lake Superior to the sea. February 8, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 185; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WATKINS, JOHN ELFRETH. The development of the American rail as
illustrated by the collection in the U.S. Nat. Museum. From the report
of the Nat. Mus., 1888-'89, pp. 651-708. Washington, 1891. 60pp.

---- The Ramsden dividing engine. From the Smithsonian report for 1890.
Washington, 1891. 21pp., 3 pls.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 832.


WEBB, ALEXANDER R., _Consul._ Commerce of the Philippine islands. 10pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 146-155.


WEBSTER, F. M. Notes on the grain toxoptera. 4pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4. nos. 7-8, pp. 245-248.

---- Early published references to some of our injurious insects. 4pp.

    Insect Life, v. 4, nos. 7-8, pp. 262-265.

---- Report of entomological work of the season of 1891. 12pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Entomology: Bulletin no. 25, pp. 63-74.


---- WILLIAM. Report from the Secretary of State upon the claim of
Webster against Great Britain. January 26, 1892. 18pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 23; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WEDDERBURN, ALEXANDER J. Special report on the extent and character of
food adulterants, including state and other laws relating to foods and
beverages. Washington, 1892. 174pp.
                                                            .50

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 32.


WEDGWOOD, WILLIAM W. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill granting an honorable discharge to W. W. Wedgwood.
February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 121; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WEEKS, STEPHEN B. Raleigh's settlement on Roanoke Island. An historical
survival. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep., 1890, pp. 97-98.


WELSH, WILLIAM. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of William Welsh. February 16, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 354; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WERNHAM, F. H. On aerial locomotion. From the Smithsonian report for
1889. Washington, 1890. 21pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 789.


WERTHEIM, NICHOLAS, _Consul_. The imperial Moscow technical school.
2pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 161-162.


WEST, BLUFORD. Report from the committee on Indian affairs favoring
bill for the relief of the estate of B. West. (For use of salt works by
cherokee nation.) February 6, 1892. 9pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 182; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WEST VIRGINIA. Report from the committee on claims to accompany S. res.
9 in relation the refunding a portion of the direct tax of 1861 to W.
Va. January 18, 1892. 14pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 31; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on claims favoring bill to refund W.
Virginia money paid 133 reg't W. Va. militia. January 25, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 99; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WESTERN PAVING AND SUPPLY COMPANY. Report from the committee on claims
favoring bill for payment of claim of the Western Paving and Supply
company. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 22; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WHEATON, W. R., and CHAMBERLAIN, C. H. Report from the committee on
public lands favoring bill for the relief of Wheaton and Chamberlain.
(Clerk hire advanced in land office.) January 18, 1892. 24pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 38; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WHITE, CHARLES ABIATHAR. The Texan permean and its mesozoic types of
fossils. Washington, 1891. 51pp., 4 pls.
                                                            .10

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 77.

---- Correlation papers. Cretaceous. Washington, 1891. 273pp., 3 pls.
.20

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 82.


---- EMERSON E., _ll. d._ Promotions and examinations in graded
schools. Washington, 1891. 64pp.
                                                            .25

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 7,
    1891.

---- Technical training in American schools. 4pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 963-966.


---- F. F. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill to pay
White for a horse taken by the government. January 14, 1892. 3pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 30; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WIGFALL, F. H., _Consul_. Labor in Leeds. 6pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 186-191.


WILLARD, A., _Consul_. Commerce and mines of Sonora. 8pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 140, pp. 122-129.


WILLITS, EDWIN. The coöperation of the Department of Agriculture with
the educational forces in the United States relating to agriculture.
Washington, 1892. 20pp.


WILLIAMS, CHARLES P., _Consul._ Navigation from Paris to the sea. 5pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 136, pp. 1-5.


---- HENRY SHALER. Correlation papers. Devonian and carboniferous.
Washington, 1891. 279pp.
                                                            .20

    U.S. Geol. Survey: Bulletin no. 80.


---- W. A., _d. d._ Franklin College, New Athens, Ohio. Sketch. 3pp.

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 5,
    1891, pp. 203-205.


WILLOUGHBY, WILLIAM F. State activities and politics. (Abstract.) 2pp.

    Am. Hist. Assoc. rep. 1890, pp. 85-86.


WILSON, EZRA A. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of E. A. Wilson. February 6, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 179; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


---- THOMAS. Criminal anthropology. From the Smithsonian report for
1890. Washington, 1891. 72pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 829.


---- WILLIAM F. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of W. F. Wilson. (For use and occupancy.) January 25, 1892.
2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 96; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WINDER, WILLIAM A. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill to restore W. A. Winder to the U.S. army, etc. February
5, 1892. 4pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 108; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WINLOCK, WILLIAM CRAWFORD. The progress of astronomy for 1889, 1890.
From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 64pp.
                                                            .25

    Smithsonian pub. no. 804.


WINN, D. M. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of D. M. Winn, former postmaster. February 5, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 59; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

WINTON, A. L. On the use of sodium chlorine in the Lindo-Gladding
method of determining potash. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Division of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 148-150.


WISE, CURTIS P. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to remove charge of desertion against C. P. Wise. February 6,
1892. 9pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 181; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WITSKOWSKI, B., and GORE, J. H. The history of geodetic operations in
Russia. From the Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 22pp.
.10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 812.


WOODBURN, JAMES ALBERT. Higher education in Indiana. Washington, 1891.
200pp., 32 pls.
                                                            .50

    Interior Dep't, Bureau of Education: Circular of information no. 1,
    1891.


WOODMAN, GEORGE E. The proper place of form study in education. 3pp.

    Clarke, I. E., Art and industry, pt. 2, pp. 1272-1274.


WOODRUFF, HENRY. Memorial.--Claim against Venezuela in respect to first
mortgage bonds of "Ferro-carril del Este." March 22, 1892. 8pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 100; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WOODS, C. D. Feeding stuffs low in carbohydrates. 3pp.

    Agr'l Dep't, Div. of Chemistry: Bulletin no. 31, pp. 34-36.


WOODWARD, ROBERT SIMPSON. Mathematical theories of the earth. From the
Smithsonian report for 1890. Washington, 1891. 20pp.
                                                            .10

    Smithsonian pub. no. 805.


WORCESTER, ALFRED J. Report from the committee on military affairs
favoring bill for the relief of A. J. Worcester. (For pay and grade.)
January 14, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep, no. 25; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WORKMAN, THOMAS C. Adverse report from the committee on military
affairs on bill for the relief of T. C. Workman. February 8, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 210; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WORLD'S FAIR, CHICAGO. Mr. Henderson's resolution of inquiry concerning
the World's Fair. 3pp.

    H.R. mis. doc. no. 68; 52d Cong., 1st. sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations favoring resolution
for inquiry touching the management of the world's fair and
expenditures therefor. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 10; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill (H.R.
618) authorizing the Secretary of War to detail certain army officers
to special duty in connection with the world's fair. February 9, 1892.
1p.

    H.R. rep. no. 236; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Annual report of the World's Fair Columbian commission, and other
papers relating to the exposition. February 25, 1892. 92pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 142; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury requesting an
appropriation for the government exhibit. March 5, 1892. 1p.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 153; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on banking and currency favoring bill
(H.R. 8001) to authorize a national bank at Chicago to establish a
branch office upon the grounds of the exposition. April 19, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 1136; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Estimates for appropriations for the board of lady managers for
1892-'93. 2pp.

    H.R. ex. doc. no. 157; 52d Cong., 1st sess.

---- Report from the committee on appropriations on the management of
the world's fair, and expenditures, etc. [With testimony.] May 20,
1892. xv+698pp., 1 pl.
                                                           1.25

    H.R. rep. no. 1454; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WORTHINGTON, JOHN, _Consul_. The electric lighting of Malta. 9pp.

    U.S. Consular Reports no. 138, pp. 537-545.


WRIGHT, HENRY H. Adverse report from the committee on military affairs
on bill for the relief of H. H. Wright. February 8, 1892. 2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 203; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


WYOMING. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring bill
(S. 521) granting to Wyoming certain lands in the Fort D. A. Russell
military reservation for fairgrounds. February 4, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 166; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


YAQUINA BAY, OR. Letter from the Secretary of War transmitting report
of improvements the entrance of Yaquina Bay. February 8, 1892. 8pp.
    Sen. ex. doc. no. 30; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK. Report of the superintendent, to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 21pp.

---- Letter from the Secretary of the Interior relative to certain
settlers within the Yellowstone National Park. February 29, 1892. 13pp.

    Sen. ex. doc. no. 47; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK. Report of the acting superintendent to the
Secretary of the Interior, 1891. Washington, 1891. 10pp.


YOSEMITE VALLEY and MARIPOSA BIG TREE GROVE. Memorial. February 29,
1892. 2pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 84; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


YOUNG, WM. F. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for the
relief of W. F. Young. February 5, 1892. 3pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 62; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ZANONE, JULIUS C. Report from the committee on claims favoring bill for
the relief of J. C. Zanone. (For rent of building.) February 5, 1892.
2pp.

    H.R. rep. no. 119; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ZELL, HENRY. Report from the committee on military affairs favoring
bill to retire H. Zell. January 19, 1892. 2pp.

    Sen. rep. no. 45; 52d Cong., 1st sess.


ZOOLOGICAL PARK. Letter from the Secretary of the Smithsonian
Institution recommending an increase of appropriation for maintenance
of the park. April 4, 1892. 4pp.

    Sen. mis. doc. no. 114; 52d Cong., 1st sess.




Life-Size Portrait Etching of George Washington

BY HENRI LE FORT, OF PARIS.

This great work by the President of the French Society of Etchers has
been pronounced everywhere to be a masterpiece of art. Both the French
and American governments promptly gave it the stamp of their approval
by becoming early purchasers. We have bought from the artist all the
copies remaining in his possession, and offer them as follows:

    Signed Artist's Remarque Proof, on Japan paper   $100.00
    Ordinary Prints                                    18.00

    HENRI LE FORT'S GEORGE WASHINGTON.

    Between the two windows of the late General Grant's library is a
    large portrait bust of Washington, engraved by Henri Le Fort, said
    by Mr. McLane and others to be the best presentment they had seen
    of the great founder of American independence. Mr. Huntington, a
    well-known amateur, possesses three hundred portraits of
    Washington, and he claims that Henri Le Fort's etching is the best.
    This celebrated French aquafortist obtained the following rewards:
    A medal at the Paris Salon in 1881; a medal at the Boston
    Exposition in 1883; a diploma of honor at Caen.; a medal at
    Amsterdam, and one this year at Antwerp. All these medals were
    awarded on HENRI LE FORT'S LIFE-SIZE ETCHING OF GEORGE
    WASHINGTON.--_Daily News_ (_Philadelphia_), _December 18, 1885_.


Life-Size Portrait Etching of Christopher Columbus.

BY F. FOCILLON, OF PARIS.

This is a companion picture to Le Fort's Washington by Le Fort's great
rival, whose etchings are well known in America. His work has not quite
the boldness of Le Fort, but it excels in attention to fine detail, and
has received unqualified approval from critics.

There have been printed twenty-five special remarque proofs and 100
double remarque proofs on parchment. Later on will be printed 100
remarque proofs on Japan paper and 500 on Holland paper. We can supply
at present--

    Special proofs on parchment, signed, 3 remarques
        (the centre remarque being a pen sketch)         $100.00
    Double remarque proofs, parchment, signed              72.00

    Address,

    W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO.,
    Washington, D.C.

    1424-1426 F STREET.


A Manual of Congressional Practice (The U.S. Red Book).

BY THOMAS H. McKEE.

Being an outline of the legislative and parliamentary proceedings, or
review of daily practice in the Senate and House of Representatives,
showing the actual method of work from the organization to the close of
a Congress.

Royal 8vo, 398 pages, red roan binding. Postpaid, $3.50.


LIFE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

BY WARD H. LAMON.

8vo, CLOTH, WITH PORTRAITS. POSTPAID, $5.00.

We have a few copies of this book, which has long been out of print and
rare, and now offer it at the original published price, although it has
commanded a premium.

On account of the interesting particulars of Lincoln's early life this
work will always be valuable, and this is a chance which should not be
neglected.


A Most Valuable Contribution to the Science of Anthropology.

SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL NATIONS.

A Dissertation upon the employment of excrementitious remedial agents
in Religion, Therapeutics, Divination, Love Philters, etc., in all
parts of the globe. By Captain JOHN G. BOURKE, U.S. Army, author of
"The Snake Dance of the Moquis," etc. 8vo, 496pp., cloth, gilt top,
uncut. Postpaid, $4.00

    BRIEF SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

    Urine Dance of the Zuñis--Feast of Fools in Europe--Human Excrement
    used in Food by the Insane and others--Urine in Human Food--Ordure
    of the Grand Lama of Thibet--The Stercorauistes--Bacchic Orgies of
    the Greeks--The Mushroom in connection with the Faries--The Onion
    adored by the Egyptians--Sacred Intoxication and Phallism--
    Druidical Use of the Mistletoe--Cow Dung and Cow Urine in Religion
    --Excrement Gods of Romans and Egyptians--Obscene Tenures--Obscene
    Survivals in the Games of English Rustics--Urine and Ordure as
    Signs of Mourning--Urine in Ceremonial Observances--Initiation of
    Warriors--Hunting and Fishing--Divination--Omens--Dreams--Ordeals
    and Punishments--Insults--Mortuary Ceremonies--Myths--Amulets and
    Talismans--Witchcraft--Sorcery--Charms--Spells--Incantations--Magic
    --Temple or Sacred Prostitution--Phallic Superstition in France and
    elsewhere--Worship of Cocks and Hens--Persistence of Filth
    Remedies--Easter Eggs, etc.

Any of the above sent on receipt of price by--

    W. H. LOWDERMILK & CO.,
    Washington, D.C.

    1424-1426 F STREET.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of United States Government Publications,
v. 8  Jan-Jun 1892, by Compiled

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ***

***** This file should be named 36471-8.txt or 36471-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/7/36471/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
