Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, January 1873, Vol. XIII., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, January 1873, Vol. XIII.
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest People

Author: Various

Release Date: January 31, 2008 [EBook #24474]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, JANUARY 1873 ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE

NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XIII.

        BOSTON:
        JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36 BROMFIELD STREET.
        1873.




        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1873,

        BY JOHN L. SHOREY,

        In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.





        BOSTON:
        RAND, AVERY, & CO., STEREOTYPERS AND PRINTERS.




[Illustration: Contents]



IN PROSE.

                                                    PAGE.

   The Story of the Sparrow                            1

   The Little Teacher                                  3

   Katy's Christmas-Presents                           6

   Little Mischief                                     9

   Becky                                              13

   Robert's Promise to Santa Claus                    16

   Piggy's Visit                                      18

   Stopping the Express                               22

   How Smart managed the Sheep                        25

   How Two Boys passed Christmas Morning              27

   Why the Horses jumped Overboard                    30


IN VERSE.

   Christmas Morning                                   5

   Santa Claus                                        12

   The Johnny-Cake                                    20

   What the Ship brought                              24

   The Lady-Bird (_with music_)                       32


[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF THE SPARROWS.]




THE STORY OF THE SPARROWS.


[Illustration W]E are little English sparrows. We have been two years in
America. We were brought over by Mr. Wakefield's gardener. He let us
loose in the grove; and there we have been ever since.

Mr. Wakefield has built little houses for us, and put them on the boughs
of the trees. We go into these houses when it rains hard or blows. Once
the doors of our houses were all blocked up with snow.

The winters here are much colder than in England, where we were born.
More snow falls, and thicker ice forms here. But we like our new home
very well.

Many young sparrows have been born to us. They are proud of being
Americans. They think they are cleverer than their parents, because
their parents, you see, are English. Pride is not right, is it?

There is a bird called the butcher-bird,--a very savage bird,--that
tries to kill us. We have to look out for these butcher-birds. But they
cannot get into our houses: the doors are too small for them.

There is a little bird called the snow-bird, that comes in winter. We
are not afraid of him. He is afraid of us. We drive him away when Emily
feeds us all. Emily calls us naughty when we do this: she threatens to
punish us for it.

Emily and her folks live not far from our grove. Emily has a father and
mother, a grandfather, a brother Philip, and a baby sister, whose name
is Nelly. Grandfather and Nelly are great friends. Grandfather brings
Nelly in his arms to see Emily and Philip feed us.

One day, just as it had begun to snow, we thought we would fly over and
make a call on Emily. She saw us from the window, and came out. Philip
came too. They gave us crumbs and seed. Grandfather brought baby to see
us. We did not fly off when baby said, "Goo!" We were not afraid.

By and by two saucy snow-birds came, and tried to get some of our seed.
We flew at them, and drove them off. But Emily said, "You naughty
sparrows! Let those snow-birds be! They are as good as you are, any
day."

Now, that was not kind in Emily. We think we are better and handsomer
than snow-birds. We were so much offended, that we all flew away, and
left her with her precious snow-birds.

But the next day we were hungry: so we forgave her, and made her a
visit. She was glad enough to see us. So were grandfather and baby.
Those hateful snow-birds kept out of the way.

                                                OLD MR. SPARROW.




THE LITTLE TEACHER.


LITTLE MARY is seven years old. She loves "The Nursery." She has read it
for nearly three years; and her mother says she has learned more from it
than she has learned at school.

At first she used to look at the pictures, and ask her brother Cecil to
read to her about them. Oh, how happy they were reading together! By and
by she began to try to read the story she had just heard; and soon she
learned to read to herself very well.

A black man named John has lived with Mary's father many years. He
could not read. Mary felt sorry for John. She thought he would like to
read nice stories too.

[Illustration]

One day she said, "Mamma, may I teach John to read?" "Yes, dear," said
her mother, "if you can."

After tea, Mary's mother looked into the kitchen; and what do you think
she saw? John was holding little Mary on his knee, and she was teaching
him to read.

She was pointing to the letters, one by one, and trying patiently to
make him remember his A, B, C; and John, with his eyes fixed upon the
book, was giving close attention to the words of his little teacher. It
was a pretty picture.

Mary did not give up trying until John had learned to read, though it
took a long time, and she had to give him many lessons. He tried hard to
learn; and now he is glad that he can read, and Mary is glad too.

                                                   ANNA HOLYOKE.

[Illustration]




CHRISTMAS MORNING.


        STOCKINGS in the kitchen, hung up in a row;
        Santa Claus has filled them,--yes, from top to toe;
        Purple, gold, and crimson, paint the fallen snow,--
          On Christmas Day, so early in the morning.

        Earnest little whispers from the cosey bed;
        Busy little footsteps pattering overhead;
        Down the stairs they wander, to sweet music wed,--
          On Christmas Day, so early in the morning.

        Dolls and drums and trumpets, what a sight to see!
        Whips and tops and tea-sets,--one for you and me;
        Blooming in the corner, such a Christmas-tree,--
          On Christmas Day, so early in the morning.

        Bells up in the steeples; hark! they sweetly tell
        How the blessed Saviour loves the children well;
        And they sing the glories that long since befell
          On Christmas Day, so early in the morning.

        Wee, soft, fairy footsteps outside in the hall,
        Then the words of baby musically fall,--
        "Going to kiss my papa, first one of them all!"
          On Christmas Day, so early in the morning.

                                                  GEORGE COOPER.




KATY'S CHRISTMAS-PRESENTS.


POOR Katy Carr was an invalid. She had to lie in bed all the time; for
not long ago she had a bad fall from a swing, and hurt her spine.

But Katy had brothers and sisters. There was Clover, the little girl,
who, in the picture, is seen looking over the head of the bed, behind
the pillow. There was Elsie, who is seen hugging Katy.

Sister Joanna is the girl with black curls, who stands with a stocking
in her hand. Brother Phil, not yet old enough for trousers, stands at
her side; and that boy with his hand on the knob of the bedpost is
Dorry.

It is Christmas morning; and the children have brought in presents for
poor sick Katy. Observe that nice large chair with a long-cushioned
back, ending in a footstool, and which tips back so as to be just like a
bed: that is a present from Katy's father.

See that little evergreen-tree planted in a red flower-pot: the boughs
are hung with oranges and nuts, and shiny red apples, and pop-corn
balls, and strings of bright berries. These are all presents from the
children. A little silver bell, with "Katy" engraved on the handle, is
among the pretty things.

[Illustration]

Then there is a new book, which you may spy out if you will look sharp.
How the children do enjoy seeing dear Katy happy! They have all had
presents themselves; and they will soon show them to her. They hope she
will be well enough to play with them before spring.

These children used to have rare frolics among themselves. On St.
Valentine's eve, they had many letters, most of which, I think, must
have been written by Katy.

But among them there was one from Little Red Riding Hood, over whose sad
fate Joanna used to cry. As many other children have heard about Red
Riding Hood, they will be glad to have good news of her. Here is her
letter:--

        I send you my picture, dear Johnnie, to show
        that I'm just as alive as you, and that you
        needn't cry over my fate any more, as you used
        to do. The wolf didn't hurt me at all that day;
        for I kicked and fought and cried, till he
        dropped me out of his mouth, and ran away in
        the woods to hide.

        And grandma and I have lived ever since in the
        little brown house so small, and churned fresh
        butter, and made cream-cheeses, nor seen the
        wolf at all. So cry no more for fear I'm eaten:
        the naughty wolf is shot, and, if you will come
        to tea some evening, you shall see for
        yourself, I'm _not_.

              YOURS,                  RED RIDING HOOD.

If you would like to hear more about the Carr children, you will find
their full history most charmingly written in a book called "What Katy
Did;" a story by Susan Coolidge, nicely illustrated by Addie Ledyard,
and published by Roberts Brothers.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




LITTLE MISCHIEF.


I.

I SHALL tell you some stories about a little girl whose name was Bessie
Allen. She was so fond of being busy, that she sometimes got into sad
scrapes. So people called her Little Mischief.

One day she thought her papa's hat looked rough and rusty: so what did
she do but wash it with a sponge wet in water. She thought she was
making the hat look quite nice and shiny; but she nearly spoiled it.

Her father did not like it at all when he found what she had done. He
loved his little girl; but he thought her much too meddlesome.

[Illustration]


II.

One day Bessie was at her aunt's house when the folks were away. But
Carlo the dog was at home; and Bessie had her doll Cornelia to play
with. At last she placed Cornelia up on the arm-chair with her arms over
the back.

Then seeing near by an inkstand, and a bottle of gum with a brush in it,
Bessie thought she would amuse herself by painting Carlo's face with
ink. This was very silly, and Carlo seemed to think so; for he
struggled, and tried to get away.

The brush tickled him; he did not like to taste of the ink: at last he
broke away, and hid himself under the sofa.

[Illustration]


III.

Bessie had a piece of biscuit in her pocket. She took it out, and
offered it to Carlo. It was so nice to get biscuit without having to
stand on his hind-legs first, or jump a great height, or do something
funny to earn it, that Carlo came out.

Then Bessie seized him, and tried once more to ink his face; but this
time Carlo tore himself loose, and ran out of the room, knocking over
the stool on which stood the inkstand, as he went.

In trying to stop him, Bessie soiled her nice white frock; and the ink
streamed over the carpet. Here was mischief.

Next month I will tell you more stories about Bessie Allen.

[Illustration]




SANTA CLAUS.


        SANTA CLAUS came here last night
              On his flight.
        Down the chimney-top he flew:
        He had lots of work to do,
              Well he knew.

        So he heaped the stockings high,
              Said "Good-by."
        Now, of toys he had no lack:
        They were carried on his back,
              In a sack.

        What did little Flora find?--
              Flora kind.
        Why, a doll with golden hair,
        Candies, and a tiny chair,
              I declare!

        What did bright-eyed Georgie get?--
              Mamma's pet.
        Can't you guess? A tiny gun;
        But you see it's only one
              Made for fun.

        Here's what lazy Joseph found,
              Looking round.
          It was shocking!
          In his stocking,
        There was nothing, you must know,
        But a big hole at the toe!
              Lazy Joe!

                                                  GEORGE COOPER.




BECKY.

A TRUE STORY.


AFTER I had finished reading "The Nursery" to my little Willy to-night,
he said, "Please, mamma, now tell me the story about the cat you had
when you were a little girl; then I will go to bed."

When I had told him the story, as I have told it a great many times
before, he said, "Mamma, why don't you send that story to 'The Nursery,'
so that some other little boy can hear it too?"

"Why, Willie!" said I: "do you think it is enough of a story to put in
print?"

"Of course I do!" said he. "I like it; and I ought to know what little
boys like. Now, promise me to send it; and then I will go to bed." So I
promised.

And now that my little boy has said his prayers, and is nicely tucked in
bed, I will write out the story, hoping it will amuse some other little
Willy as much as it does mine.

Here it is, just as I tell it to him:--

        When I was quite young, I had a cat to which I
        gave the name of Becky. I know nothing of her
        very early history, for she was a sober pussy
        when she was given to me; but she soon became a
        great pet in the family, and seemed very fond
        of us all, particularly of my father.

[Illustration]

        She always showed great delight when he came
        home after a long absence. She would put her
        paws on his shoulders, and rub his face, and
        purr in a most contented manner. She would
        never eat a mouse until she had first carried
        it to him; and after he had stroked her, and
        called her a good pussy, she would go away
        quite happy.

        After a time she had two beautiful kittens.
        When they were large enough to follow her
        about, I used to give them warm milk from the
        pail that was brought in from milking; but one
        morning, when the pail was set on the floor,
        the kittens were too hungry to wait for the
        milk to be dipped out for them, and, putting
        their paws on the side of the pail, began to
        lap from the top

        Becky sat quietly washing her face; but she saw
        what the kittens were doing, and thought it was
        her duty to give them a lesson in good manners:
        so she walked up to them, and boxed their ears
        till they ran away mewing piteously. They never
        again tried to lap milk from the pail.

"Tell me something else about Becky," Willy always says when I get to
this point. So I go on:--

        Becky was not so strict about her own manners.
        She would often surprise us by walking into our
        rooms without stopping to rap, or even to say
        _mew_; for she could open any door in the house
        by raising the latch with her paw.

        She had several families of kittens. Once her
        whole family was one poor little thing, which
        lived only a few days. Becky was grieved sadly
        at its death; but, after mourning for some
        time, she went into the field and caught a
        mouse, which she adopted, and treated like a
        kitten.

[Illustration]

        After Becky had been with us a long time, my
        brother was taken sick; and, as he reclined in
        an easy-chair, she used to lie for hours beside
        him.

        One day, a short time after he died, she
        entered the room, and, jumping up in the chair,
        examined it all over. Then she jumped down and
        sat on the floor, looking at the chair, and
        mewing sorrowfully. Then she went away; and we
        never saw poor Becky again, or knew what became
        of her.

"What do you _suppose_ became of her?" is Willy's question here. "Ah,
little boy! you can _suppose_ as well as I."

                                                 WILLY'S MOTHER.

[Illustration]




ROBERT'S PROMISE TO SANTA CLAUS.


ROBERT'S hope was that he should have a sled. "O Santa Claus!" said he,
"if you will only bring me a sled, I will promise to give all your other
presents away to those who need them most."

Uncle Charles heard this speech, and said, "May I send word to Santa
Claus of your promise?"

"Yes, you may," said Robert; "for I am in earnest about it. If Santa
Claus will only bring me a sled, I shall be content."

"And you will bestow his other Christmas-gifts on those who need them
most,--is that the bargain?" asked Uncle Charles.

"Yes, that is it," said Robert.

The little boy went to sleep that night, wondering who Mr. Santa Claus
was, and whether he would heed a hint from Uncle Charles.

Early Christmas morning, Robert woke; and what do you think he saw by
the side of his bed? Well, it was a fine sled, painted red, with thick
iron runners.

Robert could hardly believe his eyes. He jumped out of bed, and dressed
himself. Then, as the morning light grew clearer, he saw other
presents,--a beautiful pair of skates, a rabbit that could hop out of a
box, but was not alive, a bat and ball, a bag of marbles, a fine
pocket-knife, a silver pencil-case, a ship all rigged, a paint-box, and
many more things that I cannot name.

"And all these things are mine!" cried Robert. But he then remembered
his promise to Santa Claus, and sighed. "What a nice pair of skates!"
thought he. "And this knife and this pencil-case,--they are just what I
want. Will Santa Claus ever find it out, I wonder, if I keep them?"

It was only for a moment that the little boy hesitated. Then he put his
hand on his sled, and said, "No! a promise is a promise. Here is what I
asked for. I sent word to Mr. Santa Claus what I would do; and it would
be mean now if I were to break my promise."

I am glad to say that Robert distributed all the presents, except the
sled, among the boys and girls of his acquaintance, whose parents were
too poor to spend money on Christmas-gifts.

Uncle Charles was so much pleased with Robert's conduct, that he bought
the prettiest pair of skates he could find, and put them on Robert's
feet, and told him they were his own.

                                                  ALFRED SELWYN.




PIGGY'S VISIT.


MARY stood by the table kneading dough. Annie was washing Dolly's apron.
Bobby was making a pasteboard wagon for Dolly. Clara was rocking the
cradle, which was baby Dan's carriage to the land of Nod. Cook was
paring the "taters," as she called them. Mother sat quietly sewing on
Annie's sack. How still every thing was!

All at once piggy put his nose in at the door with an "Ugh, ugh! May I
come in?"

Mary let some flour fall; Annie hugged Dolly closely, perhaps to keep
piggy from eating her; cook got the broom; baby screamed; and Clara
laughed aloud.

Mother took the baby, and sat still. Where was piggy? and where was Bob?

Down came the broom where piggy had been; but piggy was scampering down
the path, with Bob at his heels, and in a few minutes piggy was in his
pen in the far corner of the lot, grunting with fear and weariness.

[Illustration]

Bob came up, and closed the door of the pen, "Piggy," said Bob, "naughty
piggy, to come where you are not wanted! I should think you would like
to stay in your own house, so neat and comfortable."

"Ugh, ugh!" said piggy.

"Oh! you were lonesome, were you?" said Bob. "You thought it was no more
than civil to call on your neighbors. You wanted to show us that you
were not too proud to be sociable. Next time please to send in your card
first."

"Ugh, ugh!" said piggy.

That was more than a week ago; and piggy has staid at home since then.
Perhaps he is waiting for us to return his call.

Now, how many persons have I told you about?

                                                         FANNIE.




[Illustration: THE JOHNNY CAKE.]


            THIS is the seed,
            So yellow and round,
        That little John Homer hid in the ground.

            These are the leaves,
            So graceful and tall,
        That grew from the seed so yellow and small.

            This is the stalk,
            That came up between
        The leaves so pretty and graceful and green.

            These are the tassels,
            So flowery, that crowned
        The stalk, so smooth, so strong, and so round.

            These are the husks,
            With satin inlaid,
        That grew 'neath the tassels that drooped and swayed.

            This is the silk,
            In shining threads spun:
        A treasure it hides from the frost and the sun.

            This is the treasure,--
            Corn yellow as gold,--
        That satin and silk so softly unfold.

            This is the cake,
            For Johnny to eat,
        Made from the corn so yellow and sweet.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




STOPPING THE EXPRESS.


[Illustration]

CHARLES had a small flag which his father gave him. It was fine fun for
a while to march about and wave it; but it did not seem to be of much
use. So at last Charles hit upon a plan of making his flag do some good.
This was the plan: When his father had any bundles to send to Boston,
Charles ran down to the street, and put his flag in the fence.

[Illustration]

This was a signal for the expressman to stop. When the man saw the flag
in the fence, he knew that he was to stop and take a bundle.

[Illustration]

Here he is, waiting while Charles brings out the bundle. He knows that
Charles is on the watch for him, and that there is no need of driving
through the gate. Charles likes to do errands for his father.

[Illustration]

Here is Charles, carrying out the bundle. He is running fast, because
the man cannot wait long. "Hurry up, little boy!" says the man (who is
fond of a joke); "there's no time to play marbles. This wagon must get
to the station by nine o'clock."

                                                        W. O. C.

[Illustration]




WHAT THE SHIP BROUGHT.


        OH, a happy new year to you all,
        Good children, a happy new year!
          To your fathers and mothers,
          Your sisters and brothers,
        To your grandpas and grandmas so dear.

        It's a long way good wishes to send,--
        Three thousand miles over the sea;
          When the wild winds are roaring,
          The rainstorms are pouring,
        And the waves are like mountains to see.

        May the good ship speed safe on its way,
        Though the moon and the stars be unseen!
          May the compass be steady,
          The helmsman be ready,
        And the captain all watchful and keen!

        Oh, it's pleasant, dear children, the sea,
        When the sky is all fair and serene,
          With the breeze blowing lightly,
          The sun shining brightly,
        Or at night, when the clear moon is seen.

        But now, at this "happy new year,"
        In your homes and your nurseries bright,
          Pray think how the vessel
          With wild waves must wrestle,
        Through the cold winter day and black night.

        When you read the good wishes I send
        Three thousand miles over the sea,
          I would have you remember
          'Twas in dreary December
        The ship brought this greeting from me.



        LEEDS, ENG., December, 1872.               GEO. BENNETT.




HOW SMART MANAGED THE SHEEP.


SMART was a sheep-dog that belonged to a Mr. Scott, who lived in
Scotland. On the large sheep-farms of that country a single shepherd
often has the charge of from three to six thousand sheep.

The shepherd has with him usually two dogs; of these, one is the
driving-out, the other the bringing-in dog. To the first the shepherd
points out a number of sheep, and informs him by voice and action that
he wishes him to drive them to a distant hill. The dog at once does as
he is bid.

In the same way the shepherd informs the second dog that a lot of sheep
on a distant hill are to be brought to the spot on which he then stands;
and off runs the second dog, and brings the sheep to his master.

[Illustration]

Mr. Scott's dog Smart was so trained, that he would never frighten the
sheep. In driving a flock from one pasture to another, the sheep would
often take a wrong turn, and then scamper off as fast as they could go.

At such times it is the custom of shepherds to send a dog after them at
the top of his speed. He is not long in overtaking them, when, if the
weather be warm, and the lanes narrow and dusty, the sheep are much
frightened, and not infrequently are hurt.

Now, to prevent this, Mr. Scott would order his dog Smart to go the
other side of the hedge or fence, saying, "Now, go ahead, and bring them
back, and take care not to frighten them."

Smart would trot off so that the sheep should not see him, and in a
short time would peep over or through the hedge. At length, when he had
satisfied himself that he had got ahead of the sheep, he would come out
gently in advance of them, and drive them back down the lane so quietly
as not to give them the least alarm.

Smart would never attempt to go ahead of a flock in the usual way: he
would manage so that the sheep should not know he was trying to get
ahead of them. The picture will show you how he did. Was he not a wise
dog?

                                                  UNCLE CHARLES.




HOW TWO BOYS PASSED CHRISTMAS MORNING.


THERE were two little boys who were cousins. One was named Richard; the
other was named Paul. Richard lived where he could see from his
chamber-window the Atlantic Ocean. There was a thick clump of trees at
the back of his house; and in winter the ground in front would be often
covered with snow.

Paul lived in Southern California, where, from his chamber-window, he
could see the Pacific Ocean. He had a brother Harry and two sisters. It
never snowed where he was: and he had no use for skates; for the water
never froze.

Richard had a sister Mary, of whom he was very fond. Here is what
Richard wrote to his Cousin Paul about his way of passing Christmas
morning:--

"I wish you and Harry and the girls had been with us; for we had a good
time on the ice. I'll tell you what we did. As soon as we had
breakfasted, I got out my sled 'Dauntless,' and told Mary to wrap up,
and bring her skates along.

[Illustration]

"She got ready, and took her seat on the sled. Tiger began to bark; for
he saw that a frolic was on foot. Off we started to the pond. A dozen
boys and girls were there before us. They had made a fire on an island
in the middle of the pond. It was a cool, bracing day; but the wind
didn't blow.

"Our island we called 'The Isle of Refuge,' Julia Peters named it. She
has a knack at inventing names. The island is fifteen feet long by
twelve wide; and it has a rock that makes a capital fireplace.

"We had a fine time. All the girls could skate well. Nobody broke
through the ice; but some of us had falls. No harm done. We thought of
you, and wondered what you and the rest of our cousins in California
might be about. I hope you will write me as you promised."

Well, Paul _did_ write; and here is an extract from his letter: "We all
woke early; for father had been out in a boat with some friends all
night, and we were expecting them back. We dressed, and went down to the
beach; and there, right in the face of the sun, we saw father's boat.

"Harry had a spyglass; and he knelt on the beach, and spied out father
on the deck of the boat. Mother and the girls waved their handkerchiefs,
while I jumped and shouted.

"It was a mild, lovely, morning,--so mild, that we wore our straw hats
and light clothing. We thought of you; and I said, 'Wouldn't Richard
like to be here, where Christmas morning opens as soft and warm as a day
in June?'

"But Harry cried out, 'Don't you believe it! Richard is either coasting
or skating; and I wish I were with him. How I would enjoy a high old
time on the ice, and then a coast down hill over the snow! That's the
fun for me!'

"'Well,' said mother, 'I am well content with this bright sunrise and
this delicious air. I shall not sigh for the snow and ice.' 'Nor I!'
'Nor I!' shouted Laura and Kate: so you see Harry was in a minority.

"Father soon landed in his boat; and then we all went back to the house
and had breakfast. After breakfast we had a merry time at croquet, and
then a still merrier time at foot-ball.

"As Kate will write her Cousin Mary all about the Christmas-tree, and
the things that Santa Claus brought, I shall not touch on that subject.
Now I hope, Cousin Richard, you have not forgotten your promise to write
me."

[Illustration]

Here were two little boys belonging to the same grand country,--one
writing from the shore of the Pacific, where all was balm and sunshine
on Christmas morning; and the other writing from the shore of the
Atlantic, where it was cold enough to skate. What an idea does this give
of the extent of our favored land, and the wonderful variety of its
climates and its products!

                                                   EMILY CARTER.




WHY THE HORSES JUMPED OVERBOARD.


THERE were two fine horses. Here is a picture of them. One was named
Albion, and the other Erin. Albion was the white horse, of course; for
the word "Albion" is derived from the Latin _albus_, white; and England
got the name of Albion because of its white chalky cliffs by the sea.

Well, these two fine horses belonged to Mr. Ducrow, who kept a circus.
They were on board a steamer bound for Newhaven in England. They had
been out at sea several days; and they longed to have a frolic on the
green land, and have a bite at some good crisp grass.

[Illustration]

So, when they saw the land quite near, what did they do but leap
overboard, and swim towards it! But the groom who took care of them
sprang instantly after them, and kept swimming beside them, guiding and
cheering them.

As soon as they got out of the water, and felt the green turf under
them, they snorted and gambolled, and showed their joy in various ways.
How nice the green grass must have tasted to them! and what fun it must
have been to lie down and have a good roll on the ground!

                                                  UNCLE CHARLES.





[Illustration: Music: THE LADY-BIRD]

Words by MRS. A. M. WELLS.

Music by T. CRAMPTON.


        1. Lady-bird, lady-bird,
             with a red wing!
           What are you doing?
             Poor little thing!
           Flies are no longer heard
             Buzzing around,
           Spiders have hid themselves,
             Wasps are not found.

        2 Spring is not coming yet;
            Why are you here?
          Insects don't come about
            This time of year.
          Up the cold window-pane
            Why do you roam?
          Lady-bird, lady-bird,
            Fly away home!

        3 Come when the flowers come,
            Come with the spring,
          Dear little lady-bird
            With a red wing!
          In the cold winter-days
            Why wilt thou roam?
          Lady-bird, lady-bird,
            Fly away home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This issue was part of an omnibus. The original table of contents
covered the first six months of 1873. The remaining text of the table of
contents can be found in the other issues.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, January 1873, Vol. XIII., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, JANUARY 1873 ***

***** This file should be named 24474.txt or 24474.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/4/7/24474/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
