Project Gutenberg's Notes and Queries, Number 70, March 1, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 70, March 1, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: October 26, 2007 [EBook #23204]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)





{161}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *


"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 70.]
SATURDAY, MARCH 1. 1851.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                   Page

  A Word to the Literary Men of England, by K. R. H.
  Mackenzie                                                   161

  The Essay on Satire, by Bolton Corney                       162

  Macklin's Ordinary and School of Criticism, by Dr. E.
  F. Rimbault                                                 163

  "Love's Labour's Lost"                                      163

  Notes on Newspapers, by H. M. Bealby                        164

  Mr. Gough's Translation of the History of the Bible         165

  Minor Notes:--Origin of Harlequins--Monosyllables--
  The Breeches, or Geneva Bible--Etymology of
  Mushroom--Curious Fact in Natural History--Hudibras
  in 1710--The Great Exhibition                               165

  QUERIES:--

  The Ten Commandments, by Rev. A. Gatty                      166

  Minor Queries:--Was Hugh Peters ever on the Stage?--
  English Synonymes--Christmas Day--A Coggeshall
  Job--"Saffron Walden, God help me"--T. Gilburt
  on Clandestine Marriages--Father Hehl, and Cahagnet--
  Roman Catholic Bishops in Ireland--Derivation of
  the Word Fib--Thomas May, the Author of the Supplement
  to Lucan--Bunting's Irish Melodies--Rudbeck,
  Campi Elysii--Prince of Wales' Motto--Borrow's
  Danish Ballads--Head of the Saviour--Lines
  on English History--The Sword Flamberg--Denarius
  Philosophorum--"Sees Good in everything"--Oxford
  Friar's Voyage to the North Pole--Roman
  Catholic Church--Cor Linguæ, &c.                            166

  REPLIES:--

  Cardinal's Monument                                         169

  Booty's Case                                                170

  The Conquest, by C. H. Cooper                               170

  Descent of Henry IV., by J. B. Colman                       171

  Replies to Minor Queries:--Chauncy--Entwysel--
  "Pretended" Reprint of Ancient Poetry--Lights on
  the Altar--Cognation of the Jews and Lacedæmonians--
  Queen Mary's Lament--Tandem D. O. M.                        171

  MISCELLANEOUS:--

  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                      173

  Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                174

  Notices to Correspondents                                   174

  Advertisements                                              174

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.

A WORD TO THE LITERARY MEN OF ENGLAND.

    "_Twenty scholars in seven years might retrieve the worst losses we
    experience from the bigotry of popes and califs._ I do not intend to
    assert that every Herculanean manuscript might, within that period, be
    unfolded; but the three first legible sentences might be; which is
    quite sufficient to inform the intelligent reader whether a farther
    attempt on the scroll would repay his trouble. _There are fewer than
    thirty Greek authors worth inquiring for; they exist, beyond doubt, and
    beyond doubt they may, by attention, patience, and skill, be brought to
    light._ * * With a _smaller_ sum than is annually expended on the
    appointment of some silly and impertinent young envoy, we might restore
    _all_, or _nearly all_ those writers of immortal name, whose
    disappearance has been the regret of genius for four entire centuries.
    In my opinion, a _few thousand pounds_, laid out on such an
    undertaking, would be laid out as creditably as on a Persian carpet or
    a Turkish tent."--Landor's _Imaginary Conversations--Southey and
    Porson--Works_, vol. i. p. 20.

I call upon the literary men of England, upon the English government, and
upon the public, to set the example in a glorious expedition, which, even
in this age of wonders, is one of no little importance and magnitude. I
conjure them to bear in mind the words I have placed at the head of this
article,--the opinion of one of our best and most delightful authors. This
opinion Mr. Landor, veiled under the eidolon of Porson, I feel assured,
does not hold alone; I believe it to be engraven on the "red-leaved
tablets" of the hearts of many more learned and more distinguished scholars
than myself, who am but as the trumpet which is to rouse the friends of
classical literature to action; as the bell which awakens the reaper to his
abundant harvest: but I will sustain, that on none of them is it cut more
deeply or more inextinguishably than on mine.

I propose that the friends of Classical, Scandinavian, and Oriental
literature form themselves into an Association for the Rescue of the many
ancient MSS. in the Greek, Latin, Anglo-Saxon, Norwegian, Zend, Sanscrit,
Hebrew, Abyssinian, Ethiopian, Hindostanee, Persian, Syriac, Arabic,
Armenian, Coptic, Turkish, and Chinese languages:--that application be made
to government for the pecuniary furtherance of this enterprise;--and that
the active co-operation of all foreign literary men be secured.[1]

Thus a careful and untiring search may be entered upon in all the regions
of the earth where any MSS. are likely to be found, and the recovery or
loss of the many inestimable authors of antiquity be made certain. Let the
libraries of Europe be examined strictly and inquisitorially (and this will
not be a heavy expense), and the new accessions to classical literature
printed, the MSS. {162} which present themselves of already known authors
carefully examined, and the variations to the received text marked. How
much this is wanted we experience in the corruptions of Sophocles,
Æschylus, Thucydides, Plato, and Aristoteles! In this way much that is
valuable may be recovered; much that is matter of discussion set at rest.
Let me instance the Babrian fables, and the discovery of Mr. Harris at
Alexandria; who, it was remarked to me, might have discovered the whole,
instead of a part, had proper hands unfolded the mummy.

On the advantages of this search, it were useless to expatiate: every one
is sensible of it, and, sooner or later, it _must_ occur. Let us not allow
our grandchildren to surpass us in everything, but let us set about this
ourselves. Monstrous as the idea seems, it is simple of execution.

I will not take up the space so kindly afforded me by the Editor of "NOTES
AND QUERIES" with speculation. The Association should be composed of a
Literary Section and a Business Section: the first to be under the
administration of a President and an efficient Board of Examiners, to look
into literary matters, and examine and appoint the proper officers of the
Investigation Parties; which parties must be composed of clever,
adventurous, hardy, and adroit men, obtaining the assistance of the natives
wherever they may be carrying on their researches; the Second Section to be
under the direction of a Chairman and Finance Committee, to which the
officers of the subordinate departments render their accounts.

I know not whether more will be required of me on this subject; very likely
not: but I reserve much that I could say, until that time. I have now only
to thank the Editor for inserting this long, but I will not say, wholly
uninteresting proposal.

KENNETH R. H. MACKENZIE.

  February 18. 1851.

[Footnote 1: I need not remind you how favourable an opportunity is
presented by this year.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ESSAY ON SATIRE.

Dryden, as sir Walter Scott observes, left a name in literature "second
only to those of Milton and Shakspere"; but, popular as his writings were,
he gave no collective edition of his poetical or dramatic works. The
current editions of his poems may therefore be open to censure, both on the
score of deficiency and redundancy--and such I believe to be the fact.

An _Essay on satire_, itself a coarse satire, has been ascribed to him for
more than a century on dubious authority, and the correctness of this
ascription has been properly suggested as a question for examination.

We have to decide on the credibility of two opposite statements, as made in
the publications about to be enumerated:--

    1. "The works of John Sheffield, earl of Mulgrave, marquis of Normanby,
    and duke of Buckingham. LONDON: printed for John Barber, 1723. 4º. 2
    vols."

    2. "The works of John Sheffield, earl of Mulgrave, marquis of Normanby,
    and duke of Buckingham. Printed for John Barber, alderman of LONDON,
    1726. Small 8º. 2 vols."

    3. "Original poems and translations, by John Dryden, Esq. LONDON:
    printed for J. and R. Tonson, 1743. 12º. 2 vols."

In the two former publications, the poem appears as the entire composition
of the noble author, and is said to have been "written in the year 1675."
In the latter publication it appears without date, and is said to be "by
Mr. Dryden and the earl of Mulgrave."

The publications were posthumous, and as the editors afford no explanation
of the point in dispute, we must consult the reputed authors.

In the year 1691, as an advertisement to _King Arthur_, a dramatic opera,
Dryden printed a catalogue of his "plays and poems in quarto," in order to
prevent future mis-ascriptions. The catalogue comprises ten poems, but no
_Essay on satire_. The publisher of _King Arthur_ was Mr. Jacob Tonson.

In 1682, the earl of Mulgrave published, anonymously, through the agency of
Mr. Joseph Hindmarsh, an _Essay upon poetry_. It contains these lines:--

 "The laureat here may justly claim our praise,
  Crown'd by _Mac-Fleckno_ with immortal bays;
  Though prais'd and punish'd for another's rimes,
  His own deserve that glorious fate sometimes,
  Were he not forc'd to carry now dead weight,
  Rid by some lumpish minister of state."

In 1717, Mr. Tonson published _Poems by the earl of Roscommon_; and added
thereto the _Essay on poetry_, "with the leave and with the corrections of
the author." The lines shall now be given in their amended state, as they
appear in that volume, with the accompanying notes:--

 "The _Laureat_[2] here may justly claim our praise,
  Crown'd by _Mack-Fleckno_[3] with immortal bays;
  Tho' _prais'd_ and _punish'd_ once for other's[4] rhimes,
  His own deserve as great applause sometimes;
  Yet _Pegasus_[5], of late, has born _dead weight_,
  Rid by some _lumpish_ ministers of state."

Next to Dryden and the earl of Mulgrave, as authorities on this question,
comes the elder Jacob Tonson. Both writers were contributors to his
_Poetical miscellanies_. In 1701 he published _Poems on various occasions,
etc. By Mr. John Dryden_. The volume has not the _Essay on satire_. The
same {163} Tonson, as we have just seen, gave currency to the assertion
that Dryden was "ignorant of the whole matter."

To this display of contemporary evidence must be added the information
derivable from the posthumous publications enumerated in the former part of
this article. The publication of 1723 was made by direction of the duchess
of Buckingham. The couplet, "Tho' prais'd," &c., and the appended note,
were omitted. In 1726 Mr. alderman Barber republished the volumes "with
several additions, and without any castrations," restoring the couplet and
note as they were printed in 1717. In the _Original poems_ of Dryden, as
collectively published in 1743, the joint authorship is stated without a
word of evidence in support of it.

If we turn to the earlier writers on Dryden, we meet with no facts in
favour of his claim to the poem in question. Anthony à Wood says, "the earl
of Mulgrave was generally thought to be the author." This was written about
1694. The reverend Thomas Birch, a man of vast information, repeated this
statement in 1736. Neither Congreve nor Giles Jacob allude to the poem.

The witnesses on the other side are, 1. The publisher of the _State poems_.
2. Dean Lockier. And 3. The reverend Thomas Broughton.

The _State poems_, in which the essay is ascribed to Dryden, may be called
a surreptitious publication: it carries no authority. The testimony of
Lockier, which is to the same effect, was never published by himself. It
was a scrap of conversation held thirty years after the death of Dryden,
and reported by another from memory. The reverend Thomas Broughton, who
asserts the joint authorship of the poems, cites as his authority the
_Original poems_, &c. Now Kippis assures us that he edited those volumes.
On the question at issue, he could discover no authority but himself!

Dryden _may_ have revised the _Essay on satire_. Is that a sufficient
reason for incorporating it with his works? Do we tack to the works of Pope
the poems of Wycherly and Parnell? We have authority for stating that Pope
revised the _Essay on poetry_. Is it to be added to the works of Pope? Be
it as it may, the poem was published, in substance, six years before Pope
was born!

As the evidence is very brief, there can be no necessity for
recapitulation; and I shall only add, that if about to edit the poetical
works of Dryden, I should reject the _Essay on satire_.

BOLTON CORNEY.

[Footnote 2: Mr. _Dryden_.]

[Footnote 3: A famous satyrical poem of his.]

[Footnote 4: A copy of verses called, _An essay on satyr_, for which Mr
_Dryden_ was both applauded and beaten, tho' not only innocent but
ignorant, of the whole matter.]

[Footnote 5: A poem call'd, _The hind and panther_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

MACKLIN'S ORDINARY AND SCHOOL OF CRITICISM.

Mr. George Wingrove Cooke, in his valuable work, _The History of Party_
(vol. iii, p. 66.), gives an admirable sketch of the life of Edmund Burke.
Speaking of his early career, and of the various designs which he formed
for his future course, we are told that "at _Macklin's Debating Society_ he
made the first essay of his powers of oratory."

Mr. Cunningham, in his _Handbook for London_, speaks of Macklin delivering
Lectures on Elocution at Pewterer's Hall (p. 394.), and of his residence in
Tavistock Row, Covent Garden (p. 484.); but he does not mention _Macklin's
Debating Society_. I imagine that by this "Debating Society" is meant an
_Ordinary and School of Criticism_, which that eminent actor established in
the year 1754, in the Piazza, Covent Garden. Mr. W. Cooke, in his _Life of
Macklin_, 1806, p. 199., says--

    "What induced him [Macklin] to quit the stage in the full vigour of
    fame and constitution, was one of those schemes which he had long
    previously indulged himself in, of suddenly making his fortune by the
    establishment of a tavern and coffee-house in the Piazza, Covent
    Garden; to which he afterwards added a school of oratory, upon a plan
    hitherto unknown in England, founded upon the Greek, Roman, French, and
    Italian Societies, under the title of _The British Inquisition_."

The first part of this plan (the public ordinary) was opened on the 11th of
March, 1754; and an amusing account of its operations may be found in
Angelo's _Pic Nic_, p. 32. The second part of "Macklin's mad plan," as it
was then termed, "The British Inquisition," commenced proceedings on the
21st of November in the same year; and here, according to the first
advertisement, "such subjects in Arts, Sciences, Literature, Criticism,
Philosophy, History, Politics, and Morality, as shall be found useful and
entertaining to society, will be lectured upon and freely debated."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

"LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST (Act II. Scene 1.).

    "It is odd that Shakspeare should make Dumain inquire after Rosaline,
    who was the mistress of Biron, and neglect Katharine, who was his own.
    Biron behaves in the same manner.--Perhaps _all_ the ladies wore
    masks.--STEEVENS.

    "They certainly did."--MALONE.

    "And what if they did?"--QUERY.

In what possible way can the circumstance of the ladies _wearing masks_
lessen the inconsistency pointed out by Steevens?

Rosaline has been immediately singled out by her former admirer--

    "Did I not dance with you in Brabant once?"

--a circumstance quite inconsistent with uncertain identity afterwards.

But if the gentlemen really did mistake the identity of their ladies,
Boyet's answers must have misled them into a similar mistake in _their
names_: so that the natural consequence would have been, that each lover
would afterwards address his {164} poetical effusion _nominally_ to the
wrong lady! which does not appear to have been the case.

Therefore, even if the masking be admitted, it can in no way lessen the
inconsistency of the cross questions, which to me appears to have arisen
from a most palpable instance of clerical or typographical transposition.

Steevens was on the right scent, although he rejected it in the same
breath, when he said,--

    "No advantage would be gained by _an exchange of names_, because the
    last speech is determined to Biron by Maria, who gives a character of
    him after he has made his exit."

This is a good reason against a transposition in the _male_ names, but it
is none whatever against the same occurrence in the ladies' names; and
consequently it is there that the true solution of the difficulty must be
sought.

If we admit that a substitution may have occurred, of "Rosaline" for
"Katharine," in Boyet's answer to Dumain, and _vice versâ_ in his answer to
Biron, all difficulty disappears at once.

The completeness with which the idea of transposition not only accounts for
the existence of the error, but at the same time suggests the manner in
which it may be corrected, ought of itself to secure its reception, even if
it were not corroborated in a very singular way by the following collateral
circumstance.

It may be observed that Boyet points out two of the ladies, not only by
name, but also by styling them "heirs;" one of Falconbridge, the other of
Alençon. Now in their previous descriptions of their respective lovers, one
of the ladies (Maria) says she had met Longaville at a marriage of a
"Falconbridge;" another lady (Katharine) says she had met Dumain at "Duke
Alençon's." When, therefore, we find that Boyet, in reply to Longaville's
question, designates _Maria_ as "heir of Falconbridge," it is in direct
analogy that he should, in answer to Dumain's question, designate
_Katharine_ as "heir of Alençon;" but, in consequence of the transposition
of names, Boyet appears, as the text now stands, to confer that
designation, not upon Katharine, but upon Rosaline, whom Biron had met at
Brabant!

There can be no doubt, therefore, that the names of Katharine and Rosaline
have been transposed _contrary to the author's intention_, and the only
wonder is--not that such a very commonplace error should have been
committed--but that it should have been suffered to remain through so many
editions up to the present time.

A. G. B.

  Leeds, Feb. 10. 1851.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON NEWSPAPERS.

I send you the following, as a help to "Materials for a satisfactory
History of Newspapers," alluded to in the last volume of "NOTES AND
QUERIES," p. 375.

I have in my possession some old newspapers, ranging from 1691 to 1694,
entitled _A Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade_, edited by
John Houghton, F.R.S., St. Bartholomew Lane, behind the Royal Exchange,
London. The size is a small folio, published weekly, generally every
Friday. It was carried on for some time merely as a single leaf, with no
advertisements. In this form, the editor says--

    "These papers are 2d. each here, and anybody may have them by the post.
    But where that is thought too much, it may be eased by ten or twelve
    obliging themselves constantly to take them from a bookseller,
    coffee-man, or some other, who may afford to pay a carrier, and sell
    them there for 2d., or at most 3d.; or carriers themselves may gain
    well, if they'll serve the country gentlemen. And any such bookseller,
    coffee-man, or carrier, that will apply themselves to me, shall have
    good encouragement, with liberty to return those that won't sell."

Ultimately the editor determined on admitting advertisements. He then
doubled the size of his paper, making it two leaves instead of one. In
reference to this increased size he says,--

    "My collection I shall carry on as usual. This part is to give away;
    and those who like it not, may omit the reading. I believe it will help
    on trade, particularly encourage the advertisers to increase the vent
    of my papers. I shall receive all sorts of advertisements, but shall
    answer for the reasonableness of none; unless I give thereof a
    particular character, on which (as I shall give it) may be dependence,
    but no argument that others deserve not as well."

    "I am inform'd that great numbers of gazettes are each time printed,
    which makes them the most universal intelligencers; but I'll suppose
    mine their first handmaid, because it goes (tho' not so thick, yet) to
    most parts. It's also lasting, to be put into volumes with indexes; and
    particularly there shall be an index of all the advertisements,
    whereby, for ages to come, they may be useful. I have publish'd on the
    subject of Husbandry and Trade, two quarto volumes, three folio
    volumes, with the great sheet of taxes, acres, houses, &c.; and am
    weekly carrying on this paper, which may be brought to anybodies house
    within the Bills of Mortality, or penny post, for one penny the week;
    and anywhere else in England (where enough will encourage a bookseller
    or carrier). The volumes may be had from most booksellers of England,
    Scotland, or Ireland."

The Collection, which the editor will carry on as usual, refers to the
single sheet. The Gazette must have been the London Gazette. In what sort
of way the editor could suppose that advertisements could be useful for
ages to come, we, in this age of enlightenment and knowledge, are at a loss
to conceive. The great sheet of taxes, acres, houses, &c., I have, and may
give you an account of its contents at some future time. The first page
{165} of the paper was always devoted to a letter from the editor's own pen
on husbandry, trade, chemistry, domestic cookery, and a variety of other
topics. The editor appears to have been a spirited man, who collected with
great care and diligence a great variety of facts whereby to interest his
readers. The advertisements are very curious, specimens of which I will
give you in another communication. Each paper contains the weekly prices of
wheat, rye, barley, malt, oats, horse beans, peas, coals, hops, hay,
tallow, and wool, in all the counties of England and Wales; the prices of
provisions in London; also a weekly statement of wind and weather; the
number of deaths, and their causes; the number of christenings and burials,
specifying how many of each sex. The editor often concludes a column of
information by stating, "this is all I see useful to posterity." He not
only appears to have been a man of an active mind, but also a very kind
man; for he says to those who advertise in his paper for situations, &c.,
that "if they apply themselves to me, I'll strive to help them." He appears
also to have kept a shop, or at least to have traded in certain articles:
for in one of his papers is this advertisement:--

    "In my first volume of 1682, I publish'd my own selling of chocolate,
    and have sold in small quantities ever since: I have now two sorts,
    both made of the best nuts, without spice or perfume; the one 5s., and
    the other 6s. the pound; and I'll answer for their goodness. If I shall
    think fit to sell any other sorts, I'll give notice.

    JOHN HOUGHTON."

By this advertisement we get at the date when the paper was first
published.

H. M. BEALBY.

  North Brixton.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. GOUGH'S TRANSLATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE BIBLE.

The original work is thus described by Brunet, in his _Manuel_, Paris,
1842, vol. ii. p. 583.:

    "Histoire du Vieux et du Nouveau Testament (par Dav. Martin), enrichie
    de plus de 400 fig. Anvers (Antwerp), P. Mortier, 1700, 2 vol. gr. in
    fol."

This work is usually called _Bible de Mortier_. It is not a difficult book
to be met with, but the price varies considerably according to the state of
the plates.

H. F.

_Mr. Gough's Translation of the History of the Bible_ (Vol. iii., p.
100.).--A friend has furnished me with the following extract from the
_Manuel du Libraire_ of M. J. C. Brunet in reply to my inquiry who was the
author of the original history. It is taken from tom. i. p. 544.

    "Histoire du V. et du N. Testament (par Dav. Martin), enrichie de plus
    de 400 fig. Anvers (Antwerp.), P. Mortier, 1700, 2 vol. gr. in fol."

M. Brunet informs us that copies of these volumes are valued by the state
of the plates; one of which, in the Apocalypse, having been broken, was
mended with nails, which marked the impression, and gave the distinction of
copies before or with the nails.

As there can be no doubt but that most booksellers take in your useful
publication, one of them may be induced to inform the undersigned if he has
a copy for sale, and the price.

J. M. GUTCH.

  Worcester.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_Origin of Harlequins._--In a note to his translation of Priscus' "History
of the Embassy sent to Attila by Theodosius the Younger" (_Hist. Civiliz._
app. iii. vol. ii. p. 430., Bogue's edit. European Library), M. Guizot
remarks, alluding to the appearance of Zercho, a Moor, at Attila's feast:

    "Is it not singular to find an harlequin at the court of Attila? Yet
    such is the origin of these buffoons. The colour of the black slaves,
    the strangeness of their face and manners, caused them to be sought
    after as excellent ministers of mirth; to complete the singularity,
    Zercho asks his wife at the hands of Attila, closely paralleling
    Harlequin demanding Columbine."

Is this account of the origin of Harlequins generally acquiesced in? I
should be obliged by any early notice of the character of Harlequin, and
his introduction on the English or any foreign stage.

E. L. N.

_Monosyllables_.--Among the many correspondents who have sent you specimens
of monosyllabic poetry, I have seen no one who has quoted this very
singular passage from Phineas Fletcher's _Purple Island_. It is _far more
striking_ than anything you have yet inserted on this subject.

              Canto I. Stanza 7.
 "New light new love, new love new life hath bred;
      A life that lives by love, and loves by light;
    A love to Him to whom all loves are wed;
      A light to whom the sun is darkest night:
    Eye's light, heart's love, soul's only life He is;
    Life, soul, love, heart, light, eye, and all are His;
  He eye, light, heart, love, soul; He all my joy and bliss."

In seventy words only _one_ of more than a syllable; the alliteration in
the second line is likewise noticeable.

H. A. B.

  Trin. Col., Cambridge.

_The Breeches, or Geneva Bible_ (Vol. iii, p. 17.).--I have before me a
copy of Christopher Barkar's edition of the "Breeches" Bible, 1576, small
folio, in which, on the fly-leaf, is the following interesting note in the
handwriting of the late Francis Douce:--

    "It is generally conceived that the peculiarity, 'and they sewed fig
    tree leaves together, and made themselves breeches,' belongs
    exclusively to this Bible, but it is a mistake. The Saxon version of
    Ælfric has, {166} '_and sewed fig-leaves, and worked them_ WEED-BREECH,
    _or cloaths for the breech._' Wicliffe also translates 'and maden hem
    _breechis_;' and it is singular that Littleton, in his excellent
    _Dictionary_, explains _perizomata_, the word used in the Vulgate, by
    _breeches_. In the manuscript French translation of Petrus Comestor's
    _Commentary on the Bible_, made by Guiars des Moulins in the 13th
    century, we have 'Couvertures tout autres-sint comme unnes petites
    _braies_.'"

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_Etymology of Mushroom._--In the sixteenth century this word appears
generally to have been spelt _Mushrump_. Nares, in his valuable _Glossary_,
gives an instance from Marlow's play of _Edward the Second_, 1598; but
there is an earlier example in Robert Southwell's _Spirituall Poems_, 1595:

 "He that high growth on cedars did bestow,
  Gave also lowly _mushrumps_ leave to growe."

It is also spelt _Mushrump_ in Cockeram's _Dictionary_, 1632. These
instances may possibly lead to a correct etymology of the word.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_Curious Fact in Natural History._--There is in the Brazils a popular
superstition to this effect. There is a tree called Japécarga, which is
said to grow out of the body of the insect called Cigara. This is a very
large tree, and the Cigara is an insect which makes an incessant chirping
on the tree, and, as the saying goes, chirps till it bursts. When the
insect dies, the tree is said to grow out of it, the roots growing down the
legs. My explanation is this: The insect feeds on the seeds of the
Japécarga, and occasionally, under advantageous circumstances, some of the
seeds germinate, and cause the death of the insect, the tree shooting up
through the softest part, the back, and the rootlets making their way down
the only outlets, the legs. I wish to know whether any similar fact in
Natural History has been noticed, and if not, how is it accounted for,
since I can vouch for the skin of the insect having been found with the
tree growing out of its back, and the roots growing down through the legs.

JOHN MANLEY.

  Pernambuco.

_Hudibras in 1710._--On the back of the oldest register of the parish of
Syston, Leicestershire, is the following memorandum:--

    "July 19th, 1710. Borrow'd then of Mr. Hesketh _Hudibrass_ in 3 parts,
    w^{ch} I promise to return upon demand; witness my hand,   JOHN KILBY."

A pretty strong proof of the value and interest of this work about a
century and a half ago.

ARUN.

_The Great Exhibition._--It is well known that the vineyards of Switzerland
have been long protected from hail by means of upright poles having copper
wire attached to them, termed "paragrêles," distant from each other from 60
to 100 feet. The formation of hail is an effect of which electricity is the
cause, and the cloud being deprived of this agent by the conductors,
descends in the shape of rain. Mr. John Murray, F.S.A., F.L.S., &c., in his
work on Switzerland, speaks very decidedly of their utility. Has then this
ingenious contrivance been considered with reference to the protection of
the Great Exhibition and its valuable, or rather invaluable, contents? or
why is it deemed inapplicable to the purpose?

C. T.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

Everybody can see that the first commandment is directed against
polytheism, and the second against idolatry; and most people know that the
Church of Rome differs from the Church of England in joining these two into
one commandment, and dividing the tenth into two commandments, so as to
make up the full number, ten. This point of difference betwixt the two
churches must necessarily have been the subject of much dispute. There must
be plausible reasons on both sides for every commandment in the Anglican
ritual being different from its correspondent on the Roman tables: and the
settlement of this question must properly belong to the theologian, since
holy scripture only mentions how many divine commandments there are
(Exodus, xxxiv. 28.; Deuteronomy, iv. 13., x. 4.), without authoritatively
separating them.

Will any one kindly inform me where this question may be found fully
discussed; and where mention is made of the earliest known divisions of the
law? Also, I should be glad to know how the Jews at the present day divide
the commandments; and whether there is any record or tradition of there
ever having been discussions in their church upon this very interesting and
no less important matter?

ALFRED GATTY.

  Ecclesfield.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_Was Hugh Peters ever on the Stage?_--In a pamphlet entitled _Arbitrary
Government displayed to the Life, in the illegal Transactions of the late
Times under the tyrannick Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell_, ed. 1690, p. 98.,
we are informed that Hugh Peters, after he had been expelled the University
of Cambridge, went to London, and enrolled himself as player in
Shakspeare's company, "in which he usually performed the part of Clown." Is
there any other authority for this statement?

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_English Synonymes._--What are the books of best authority for the
_synonymes_ of the English language?

A FOREIGNER.

{167}

_Christmas Day._--Which of the popes fixed dogmatically the 25th of
December as the birthday of our Saviour? Was it not either Julius I. or
II.? and what grounds had he for his decision?

J. C.

_A Coggeshall Job._--"_Saffron Walden, God help me._"--Has the old saying
of "A Coggeshall Job" occupied the attention of your readers? And why is it
that many of the mendicants who ramble the county of Suffolk in search of
relief, when asked where they come from, reply in a pitiful tone, "Saffron
Walden, God help me."

J. C.

  Easton.

_T. Gilburt on Clandestine Marriages._--I have a MS. against the validity
of clandestine marriages, dated from Oxford, June 23rd, 1682, signed T.
Gilburt. It is a learned and argumentative treatise on this subject. It is
entitled:

    "An Argument against the Validitie of Clandestine Marriages in the
    Sight of God. Sent with a Letter to a person of Qualitie desiring my
    Judgment in y^e case wherein he was too nearly concerned."

I am anxious to know who this T. Gilburt may have been.

W. F.

_Father Hehl, and Cahagnet._--If any of your numerous readers can say where
any account of Father Hehl, who in 1774 discovered animal magnetism, may be
found; and whether such a person as M. L. Alph. Cahagnet is _living_ in
Paris or elsewhere, whether he is a doctor or pharmacien, what his age may
be, and whether the persons whose letters are given in his book, _Arcanes
de la Vie future dévoilés_, are real or imaginary beings, they will greatly
comfort

ENGASTRIMYTHUS.

_Roman Catholic Bishops in Ireland._--Can any of your readers refer me to
any printed or manuscript account of the appointment of Roman Catholic
bishops in Ireland by the Stuart family subsequent to the death of James
II., containing names, dates, &c.?

DRUMLETHGLAS.

_Derivation of the Word Fib._--Can any of your readers suggest a proper
derivation of this word? Old Bailey, to whom a reference would occasionally
save many doubts and inquiries, connects it with "fable." Johnson says
nothing as to the etymology, but explains it as "a cant word among
children;" while, at the same time, he inserts it on the authority of Pope
and Arbuthnot.

In reading the works of that very learned and instructive author, Samuel
Werenfels, I was struck with a passage in his _Diatribe de Meteoris_, p.
272. (Amstel. Wetstein, 1702), which seemed to furnish a probable solution
of the question:--"Propter abusum nominis Phoebi evenit, ut omnes qui,
altius in oratione, quam decet, se extollere volunt, Gallis hodiernis
[Greek: phoibologein] Phoebum loqui, _Parler_ _Phebus_, dicantur." So far
as the sound is concerned, this seems a nearer approximation to "fib" than
the word "fable." The sense, too, is not _very_ remote from the accepted
one of "_talking fibs_." Query, as to this conjecture?

C. H. P.

  Brighton, Feb. 10. 1851.

_Thomas May, the Author of the Supplement to Lucan._--Who was this Thomas
May? To an Elzevir edition of Lucan, 1658, Amsterdam, "accuranto Cornelio
Schrevelio," there is added "Supplementum Lucani Libri Septem; authore
Thoma Maio, Anglo." In the preface it is stated, "Supplementum Lucani ab
Anglo quodam antehâc seorsim editum, et huic materiæ aptissimum adjunximus,
ne quid esset quod hic desideraretur." In the fourth book of this
_Supplement_, Cato is represented as soliloquising before his death as
follows:--

 "Quam diversa, inquit, restant post funera sortes!
  Credo equidem, divine Plato, te dogmata vera
  Hæc ipsum docuisse Deum. Deus ipse sequendam
  (Aut Natura homines ratioque innata fefellit)
  Proposuit virtutem, et præmia debita justis
  Hæc quonian justos injusta potentia fraudat
  Sæpius in terris, et gens humana rebellat
  Solvere post mortem justissimus ipse tenetur."

The famous soliloquy in Addison's _Cato_ seems to resemble this, in its
general tone of thought. In a former passage occur these lines:--

             "Solatia sola hæc,
  Quod meliore frui post mortem lumine sperat.
  Immortalem animam spes hæc probat."

The idea is similar to that contained in--

 "Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
  This longing after immortality?"

Addison seems to me to have had May's description of Cato's death in his
mind, when he wrote the soliloquy.

J. H. L.

_Bunting's Irish Melodies._--This admirable musical scholar many years
since promised a new edition of the first two volumes of his _Irish Airs_.
Is there any hope of this being soon accomplished?

GEORGE STEPHENS.

  Stockholm.

_Rudbeck, Campi Elysii._--A copy of this work is said to exist in
Sherard's[6] _Collection_, in the Botanical Garden, Oxford. It must have
been acquired _before_ 1797. (See _Bibliotheca Banksiana_, iii. 67.)

Vol. I.--The title and some following leaves are written. Does any note
exist as to _who_ copied these leaves, or _when_, or _where_?

Is any name of any former owner written on the book-back, title, or
elsewhere; or is it known when it was purchased, or at what price?

{168} Does any library-mark, auction-number, or other identifying signature
occur?

Is it quite complete at the end, or is anything missing after page 224.?

Does the whole consist of figures, or have some leaves an introduction,
text, or corrections, &c.?

Vol. II.--Does anything in this volume illustrate any of the above
questions?

A SWEDISH BIBLIOGNOST.

  Stockholm.

[Footnote 6: Sherard, 1738.]

_Prince of Wales' Motto_ (Vol. iii., p. 106.).--The Query of EFFESSA is one
of great interest to us "Taffies," but I wish to add the following to it.
Is there any foundation for the idea, which we so strenuously maintain,
that "_Ich Dien_" is a misspelled edition of "_Eich Dyn_," "Behold the
man:" and that the motto was bestowed on Edward of Carnarvon in consequence
of his royal father having learned these two Welsh words, and made use of
them when he presented his infant to the assembled tribes as a prince who
could "speak no word of English?"

SELEUCUS.

_Borrow's Danish Ballads._--The singular author of _Lavengro_, Mr. Geo.
Borrow, some years ago published certain translations of Danish or other
northern ballads, with which I have never been able to meet. Can you or any
of your readers furnish me with the title of the book and publisher's name?

My curiosity respecting it has again been aroused somewhat strongly by the
account in _Lavengro_ of the way in which he began to study Danish. It
might afford a good lesson to all _young_ "philologers."

I presume that, at the mature age of "NOTES AND QUERIES," commonplace
compliments as to its usefulness and high general value, begin to be very
stale; but I cannot close without a hearty "God speed" to you in your
labours.

BRUNO.

_Head of the Saviour._--Can any of your readers give me some information
about an engraving of our Saviour, which may just now be seen in many of
the London print-shops? It represents the side-face, and is said to be a
fac-simile of a likeness engraved on an emerald by order of some Roman
Emperor, and which served as the ransom of some other famous person (who, I
quite forget). Is this really the truth?

P. M. M.

_Lines on English History._--_The Sword Flamberg._--I shall be greatly
obliged to any of your correspondents who can inform me where I can procure
a copy of some lines on English history, commencing:

 "William the Norman conquers England's state--
  In his own forest Rufus meets his fate," &c.

They are said to be written by a Roman Catholic gentleman named Chaloner.

I also wish to know something about the old German sword called the
"Flamberg." I have seen it represented as twisted like a column of flame,
and should like to know its history, and whether there was any allusion in
it to the flaming sword that kept the gate of Paradise.

Mention is made of it by Körner in his poem, "Männer und Buben:"

         "Stosst mit an
          Mann für Mann
  Wer den Flamberg schwingen kann."

Can your correspondents tell me, also, whether there is such a phrase,
expressive of the place where four roads met, as a "four warnt way," and
whence its origin, and how properly spelt?

AN ENGLISH MOTHER.

_Denarius Philosophorum._--Can you inform me what the inscription "Denarius
Philosophorum" means, on Bishop Thornborough's monument in Worcester
Cathedral?

D. Y.

_"Sees Good in everything."_--Where does the line,

 "Sees good in everything, and God in all."

come from?

D. Y.

  Christchurch, Oxford.

_Oxford Friar's Voyage to the North Pole._--In a book I have, entitled
_Prospects of the most famous Parts of the World_, date 1646, occurs the
following:

    "Towards the north pole we have gained, more in proportion, as far as
    Nova Zembla, and the sea is known to be navigable to the 81st degree:
    whether the rest be land or not it never yet appeared to any (as I
    heare of) but an Oxford Friar by a Magique voyage. He reports of a
    Black Rock just under the pole, and an Isle of Pygmies; other strange
    miracles, to which, for my part, I shall give little credit till I have
    better proof for it than the Devil's word."

Query, Who was the friar? and where is the account of his voyage to be
found?

J. Y. R.

_Roman Catholic Church._--The Rev. J. M. Neale has just published an
appendix to his _Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern Church_,
containing a list of all the sees in that communion, with the names of the
present possessors. Can any of your correspondents inform me where I can
meet with a similar notitia of the sees in the Roman Catholic Church?

E. H. A.

    [The _Almanach du Clergé de France_ contains a catalogue of Roman
    Catholic bishops throughout the world, complied from documents
    furnished by the Congregation De Propaganda Fide of Rome.]

_Cor Linguæ._--May I ask who is the author of the following epigram, quoted
by Coke on the trial of Garnet?

 "Cor linguæ foederat naturæ sanctio,
  Veluti in quodam certo connubio;
  Ergo cum dissonent cor et locutio,
  Sermo concipitur in adulterio."

J. BS.

{169}

_Bishop Hooper's Godly Confession, &c._--Being engaged in editing Bishop
Hooper's works, and finding myself impeded by want of the original edition
of his _Godly Confession and Protestation of the Christian Faith_, printed
at London by John Day, 1550, I am induced to seek your assistance, and to
ask whether you can inform me where a copy of the above work may be found?

(THE REV.) CHARLES NEVINSON.

  Browne's Hospital, Stamford.

_Extradition, Ignore, Diamagnetism._--In pursuance of my note to you
regarding the definition of words in science and literature which may have
sprung up of late years, will you allow me to quote, as instances in the
latter department, the two words "extradition" and "ignore?"

1. Is the following a correct definition of "extradition," viz., "the
surrender by a state, of a political refugee, at the request of a foreign
power?"

2. Is the etymology of the word made up of "extra" and "ditio" put for
"deditio," a giving up or surrendering?

Does "ignore" mean to "treat as non-existent;" and are there no other words
in the language which express exactly the meaning conveyed by these two?

In science, I would ask, is "diamagnetism" correctly explained by terming
it "the property of any substance whereby it turns itself, when freely
suspended, at right angles to the magnetic meridian."

P. S.

_Cinquante Lettres d'Exhortation._--Can any of your readers inform me who
is the author of the following work?--

    "Cinquante lettres d'exhortation et de consolation sur les souffrances
    de ces derniers tems, et sur quelques autres sujets; écrites à diverses
    personnes par Mons. D. V. B. pendant ses exils et ses prisons, en
    France; et depuis que par ordre du Roi, il s'est retiré en Hollande. La
    Haye, 1704, 8vo."

The copy which I have seen is lettered on the back "Beringke-Lettres;" but
I can find no account of any person of that name at all likely to have
written the letters, nor any authority for ascribing their authorship to a
person of that name.

TYRO.

  Dublin.

_Old Tract on the Eucharist._--Can any of your readers tell me the name of
the author of the following tract?--

    "A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church,
    relating to the Eucharist. Lond. 1688."

Wishing to procure a copy, I have asked several booksellers, but without
success. It has been most strongly recommended by a writer of the present
day.

ABHBA.

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies.

CARDINAL'S MONUMENT.

(Vol. iii., p. 106.)

Your correspondent and querist, J. D. A., asks for some information
respecting the coat of arms surmounted by a cardinal's hat, sculptured and
affixed to one of the pillars of the south transept in St. Saviour's
Church, Southwark. I send in reply an extract from a now scarce book,
Arthur Tiler's _History and Antiquities of St. Saviour's_, 1765, with which
all the later historians of the church agree:--

    "Anno 1400.   2 Hen. IV.

    "The whole church was new built about this time; Henry Beaufort (second
    son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, son of Edward III.), Cardinal
    of St. Eusebius, and Bishop of Winchester from the year 1405 to the
    time of his death in 1447, might have contributed towards the building,
    being a man of great wealth, for which he was called the rich Cardinal,
    _as the arms of the Beauforts are carved in stone on a pillar in the
    south cross aisle; and by the remaining sculpture on each side it
    appears to be done for strings pendant from a Cardinal's hat placed
    over them_. The arms are quarterly France and England, a border compone
    argent and azure."

When the transepts were rebuilt, some years since, the cardinal's hat,
which till that time was nearly defaced, was then restored, and the coat of
arms newly emblazoned.

W. B.

  19. Winchester Place, St. Saviour's, Southwark.

    [G. A. S. and JAMES H. SMITH have forwarded similar replies.]

With reference to the Query of J. D. A. (p. 106. antè), it would appear
that the cardinal's hat, but with a difference in the number of rows of
tassels, is sometimes seen on the monuments of men who never were raised to
that dignity.

In the Cathedral of St. Canice, Kilkenny, are two monuments placed there
during the rule of the Confederate Catholics, viz., that of James Cleere,
"Protonotarius et Rector ecclesiæ D. Joannis Dioecesis oporiensis," who
died A.D. 1643, Nov. 14; and David Rothe, intrusive Roman Catholic Bishop
of Ossery, who died some years after--on both of which the arms of the
individual are surmounted by a cardinal's hat. It is quite certain that
neither of these ecclesiastics had a right to this distinction _as
cardinals_. For the right of Bishops and Prothonotaries to wear hats or
caps of the same shape as the cardinals, with their colours and
peculiarities, see _Glossary of Heraldry_ (Oxford), under "Cap-Cardinals."
Any further examples will oblige

J. GRAVES.

  Kilkenny, Feb. 10. 1851.

The Cardinal's hat, with arms beneath, on a pillar near the poet Gower's
monument, in St. Saviour's, Southwark, refers directly to the beneficence
of that busy cardinal and very remarkable man, {170} Cardinal Beaufort,
Bishop of Winchester, and who in that capacity resided in the adjoining
palace; indirectly it refers to the marriage of James V. of Scotland with
Jane Beaufort, the Cardinal's niece: and it is something to the honour of
St. Mary Overies, (the church in question,) to add that it was within its
walls that the ceremony took place. Besides Gower, the parish registers
state that Edmond Shakspeare ob. 1607 (one of the brothers of the great
dramatist), John Fletcher ob. 1625, and Philip Massinger ob. 1640. (See Mr.
Knight's _Old England_, eng. 548. p. 147.)

BLOWEN.

A cardinal's hat is differenced by colour and the number of its tassels,
not by its shape, which is the same for all clergymen. Thus, for simple
priests, a black hat, with one tassel on either side; for a bishop, a green
hat with three tassels; for a cardinal, a crimson hat with five or seven
tassels. What the reason may be for the variation in the number of the
tassels amongst cardinals, I should be glad to learn.

W. D-N.

In Ciaconius (_Vitæ et Res Gestæ Pontificum_, Rome, 1630), there is a list
of all the cardinals created up to that date, with their armorial bearings;
and the only instances of France and England quarterly (which is, no doubt,
what is intended), are those of Cardinal Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester,
and Cardinal Hallum, Bishop of Salisbury. I can find no mention anywhere of
the family of Cardinal Hallum, or Hallam; and should be glad to know who he
was descended from, and why he had those arms assigned to him by Ciaconius,
who is tolerably correct.

A. W. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOTY'S CASE.

(Vol. iii., p. 40.)

I cannot refer DEMONOLOGIST to an _authentic_ report of Booty's case, but I
believe none is more so, than that in Kirby's _Wonderful and Eccentric
Museum_, vol. ii. p. 247.

The following extract is given from the journal of Mr. Spinks:--

    "Friday, 15th May, 1687. We had the observation of Mr. Booty this day.
    Captain Barrisby, Captain Bristowe, Captain Brown, I, and Mr. Ball,
    merchant, went on shore in Captain Barnaby's boat, to shoot rabbits
    upon Stromboli; and when we had done we called all our men together by
    us, and about half an hour and fourteen minutes after three in the
    afternoon, to our great surprise, we all of us saw two men come running
    towards us with such swiftness that no living man could run half so
    fast as they did run, when all of us heard Captain Barnaby say, 'Lord
    bless me, the foremost is old Booty, my next-door neighbour;' but he
    said he did not know the other that run behind: he was in black
    clothes, and the foremost was in grey. Then Captain Barnaby desired all
    of us to take an account of the time, and put it down in our
    pocket-books, and when we got on board we wrote it in our journals; for
    we saw them into the flames of fire, and there was a great noise which
    greatly affrighted us all; for we none of us ever saw or heard the like
    before. Captain Barnaby said he was certain it was old Booty, which he
    saw running over Stromboli and into the flames of Hell. It is stated
    that Captain Barnaby told his wife, and she told somebody else, and
    that it was afterward told to Mrs. Booty, who arrested Captain Barnaby
    in a thousand pound action, for what he had said of her husband.
    Captain Barnaby gave bail to it, and it came on to a trial in the Court
    of King's Bench, and they had Mr. Booty's wearing apparel brought into
    court, and the sexton of the parish, and the people that were with him
    when he died; and we swore to our journals, and it came to the same
    time within two minutes; ten of our men swore to the buttons on his
    coat, and that they were covered with the same sort of cloth his coat
    was made of, and so it proved. The jury asked Mr. Spinks if he knew Mr.
    Booty. He answered, 'I never saw him till he ran by me on the burning
    mountain.'"

The chief justice from April, 1687, to February, 1689, was Sir Robert
Wright. His name is not given in the report, but _the judge_ said--

    "Lord have mercy upon me, and grant that I may never see what you have
    seen: one, two, or three may be mistaken, but thirty never can be
    mistaken. So the widow lost her suit."

An action for slander of a deceased husband, brought by the widow, and the
defendant held to bail, is a remarkable beginning. The plea of
justification, that Booty ran into Hell, is hardly supported by evidence
that he ran into the flames at Stromboli. The evidence was, that the
defendant _said_ that one of the two runners was Booty; it does not appear
that the other witnesses knew him. The witnesses must have kept a good look
to observe the buttons of Booty's coat when he ran more than twice as fast
as any living man could run. Finally, as the time of the death and the
observation "came to the same within two minutes," and Stromboli is about
15° east of Gravesend, Booty must have run to Hell before he died.

I have no doubt that "the case is well known in the navy." The facts are of
the sort usually reported to the marines; but the law such as was unknown
before 9 & 10 Vict. c. 95.

H. B. C.

  U. U. Club, Feb. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CONQUEST.

(Vol. ii., p. 440.; Vol. iii., p. 92.)

I question the position of S. K., that the phrase "post conquestum" is used
in the deed he cites (Vol. ii., p. 92.) for the accession of the king.
"Post conquestum" was, in records and deeds, applied with more or less
frequency to all our kings, from Edward III. to Henry VIII. To show this I
give the following references to the pages of Madox's _Formulare
Anglicanum_:-- {171}

EDWARD III. 12. 19. 92. 94. 120. 121. 139. 140. 166. 167. 168. 201. 203.
228. 229. 230. 264. 282. 283. 318. 322. 349. 361. 362. 386. 387. 388. 389.
402. 403.

RICHARD II. 66. 96. 122. 123. 140. 141. 169. 203. 268. 284. 323. 325. 326.
327. 362. 390. 404. 405. 410.

HENRY IV. 67. 97. 98. 124. 125. 142. 172. 204. 205. 269. 270. 284. 285.
328. 329. 330. 350. 391. 405. 407.

HENRY V. 67. 68. 126. 143. 144. 206. 285. 331. 391. 408. 420.

HENRY VI. 18. 34. 100. 101. 103. 104. 126. 127. 145. 147. 148. 206. 207.
208. 233. 270. 271. 286. 331. 332. 333. 334. 351. 364. 392. 393. 394. 409.
410. 434.

EDWARD IV. 128. 148. 209. 234. 286. 335. 352. 365. 394. 395.

RICHARD III. 108. 209. 212. 411.

HENRY VII. 71. 214. 235. 339. 352. 365. 396. 412. 438.

HENRY VIII. 235. 236. 273. 343. 396. 414.

I believe "post conquestum" was also applied to Edward V.; but the records
and deeds of his short reign are necessarily but few.

I conjecture that the use of the term "post conquestum" thus originated.

As we had Kings of England of the name of Edward before the Conquest,
Edward the First was distinguished from these monarchs by being styled
"King Edward, the son of King Henry" (his father was called "King Henry,
the son of King John"). In like manner, Edward II. was distinguished from
his father by being called "King Edward, the son of King Edward;" but
Edward III. could not thus be distinguished from his father; he was
therefore called King Edward III.; but, as there were Kings Edward _before_
the Conquest, the third was qualified by the addition of the phrase in
question, "post conquestum." To Richard II. generally, and to his
successors up to Henry VIII. either generally or occasionally, the same
phrase, "post conquestum," was also applied; but, if we except Edward IV.
and V., this phrase was not at all required, or applicable in their cases,
inasmuch as no King of England _before_ the Conquest was named either
Richard or Henry.

C. H. COOPER.

  Cambridge, Feb. 4. 1851.

       *       *       *       *       *

DESCENT OF HENRY IV.

(Vol. ii., p. 375.; Vol. iii., p. 120.)

Upon the deposition of Richard II., 30th September, 1399, Henry IV., then
Duke of Lancaster, claimed the crown in the following terms:

    "In the name of the Fader, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, I, Henry of
    Lancastre, chalenge this Rewme of Ynglonde and the Croune, with all the
    Membres and the appurtenances, als I that am descendit be ryght lyne of
    the Blode comyng fro the gude Lord King Henry thirde, and thorghe that
    ryght that God of his grace hath sent me with helpe of my kyn and of my
    friendes to recover it: the which Rewme was in poynt to be ondone for
    defaut of Governance, and undoying of the gude Lawes."

Rapin observes upon this (vol. i. p. 476.):--

    "It was not without reason that he affected to make use of obscure
    expressions, which left undetermined the foundation upon which he built
    his pretended right. If he seemed to derive his title from Henry III.
    rather than from Edward III., his grandfather, it was because there was
    a rumour that Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, surnamed Crouch-back, was
    eldest son of Henry III.; but by reason of his deformity Edward I., his
    younger brother, was placed on the throne. According to this
    supposition, the Duke would have made the ignorant believe he could
    ground his title upon being son of Blanch of Lancaster, granddaughter
    of Edmund Crouch-back, and heiress of that family. But as he was
    sensible everybody could not be imposed upon by so gross a forgery, he
    added certain expressions, intimating that he built his right also upon
    the service he had just done the state. This is the meaning of the
    claim, expressed in such obscure terms. As it was resolved to adjudge
    the crown to the Duke, the Parliament took care not to examine his
    claim too closely, but were very willing to suppose it uncontestable.
    Thus, without any regard to the just rights of the Earl of March, it
    was decreed that Henry should be proclaimed king, which was done that
    very day," &c.

It would seem, however, that Henry was to a certain extent compelled to
make his claim to the crown in the form he did (Hales, _Hist. C. L._ c.
5.), notwithstanding his desire to do so as a conqueror. (Seld. _Tit. Hon._
l. 3.)

J. B. COLMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Chauncy--Entwysel._--To a dry genealogical Query (Vol. iii., p. 61.), your
readers will wish me to reply as briefly as possible. F. R. R. will find
that Sir H. Chauncy's statement is borrowed from Weever. The latter founded
his statement, that "Wilfred Entwysel was the last heir of his house," on
the authority of Dalton, Norroy; but this statement, as your correspondent
has shown, and as other evidence would prove, is not well-founded. It may
be assumed that Sir Bertyne Entwysel did not leave issue, _male_, by Lucy
his wife, the daughter of Sir John Ashton, of Ashton-under-Lyne, as Leland
speaks of a daughter only, "of whom Master Bradene, of Northamptonshire, is
descended." His connexion with Lancashire is shown by his epitaph, and by
our finding his name as a witness to a Lancashire charter. The alliance
which he formed may be urged as a further proof. Leland's expression, that
"he came into England," may imply that Sir Bertyne remained in France
discharging the duties of his office, from the period of the Battle of
Agincourt, where he {172} signally distinguished himself, until his
services were again called for in the Wars of the Roses.

J. H. M.

_"Pretended" Reprint of Ancient Poetry_, in J. Taylor's Catalogue of 1824
(Vol. ii., p. 463.), replied to by CATO (Vol. ii., p. 500.).--My attention
has been drawn to the above, wherein doubts have been raised as to the
existence of a volume supposed to be UNIQUE; and criticisms follow on my
note, which records the fact, that "only TWO COPIES were reprinted." CATO
has already stated that the reprinting the TWO COPIES was at the expense of
the late Rev. Peter Hall; and ONE COPY produced at his sale twenty
shillings: the other copy bore the impress of Mr. Davidson, a highly
respectable printer; and that only two copies were reprinted, one of which
came direct to me from the Rev. Peter Hall. This copy was purchased from me
by an eminent statesman, who has formed one of the finest libraries in the
kingdom.

JAMES TAYLOR, Formerly of Blackfriars Road.

  Newick, Jan. 27. 1851.

_Lights on the Altar._--I would refer your correspondent D. SHOLBUS (Vol.
ii., p. 495.) to one of the Canons published under King Edgar, about the
year 968. Lambard's Latin version of the ordinance is as follows:--

    "Semper in ecclesia lumen ardeat dum Missa decantetur."

([Greek: Archaionomia], ed. Wheloc. p. 70. Cantab. 1644. Compare Cressy's
_Church History of Brittany_, p. 870. A.D. 1668.)

R. G.

_Cognation of the Jews and Lacedæmonians_ (Vol. ii., p. 377.).--I should
occupy too much space in your interesting publication were I to give a list
of the critics or ethnographers who have commented on this passage, and
shall therefore be content to mention some of the most important works
which may afford sufficient information, or at least enable your
correspondent to pursue the inquiry farther.

Calmet's _Dissertation sur la Parenté des Juifs et des Lacédémoniens_,
which is included in his Dissertations, Paris, 1720, in 3 vols. 4to, and
also in his _Commentaires_.--Stillingfleet's _Origines Sacræ_, book iii.,
c. 4., who admits the probability that the Spartans had relation to
Abraham, as deriving from Phaleg, from whom Abraham came. This appears to
have been intended by the expressions of Josephus, [Greek: ex henos genous
kai ek tês pros Abramon oikeiotêtos] (book xii. c. iv.); but the Versions,
and most critics, interpret the words in the 12th chap. of 1 Maccabees,
[Greek: ek genous Abraam], as implying that they came from Abraham: see
Selden, _de Synedriis_, l. ii. c. iii. s.v.--The Rev. Charles Forster's
_Historical Geography of Arabia_, part i. sect. vi., in which he discusses
"the vestiges of Arab colonies, and maintains the Arabo-Abrahamic origin of
the Greeks."--Stephanus Morinus, in _Diss. de Cognatione Lacedæmoniorum et
Hebræorum_ (inter dissertationes viii. Dordraci, 1700, 8vo.)

Your correspondent, who, in Vol. ii., p. 230., requests to be supplied with
"a list of all the theories and publications respecting the ten tribes
commonly called the Lost Tribes," will probably be satisfied with that
furnished by Basnage's _History of the Jews_, in which, however, he
overlooks the theory of Olaus Rudbeckius, Filius, that they are to be found
neither in Asia, nor Africa, nor America, but in Lapland! The same author,
in a treatise _de Ave Selau, cujus mentio fit Numer._ xi. 31., endeavours
to establish an analogy between the Hebrew and Gothic languages.

T. J.

_Queen Mary's Lament_ (Vol. iii., p. 89.).--The following copy of verses,
written by this beautiful and unfortunate princess, during her confinement
in Fotheringay Castle, was presented to the public by the kindness of a
very eminent and liberal collector:--

 "Que suis-je helas? et de quoi sert la vie?
  J'en suis fors qu'un corps privé de cueur;
  Un ombre vayn, un objet de malheur,
  Qui n'a plus rien que de mourir en vie.
  Plus ne me portez, O enemys, d'envie,
  Qui n'a plus l'esprit à la grandeur,
  J'ai consommé d'excessive douleur,
  Voltre ire en bref de voir assouvie.
  Et vous amys qui m'avez tenu chere,
  Souvenez-vous que sans cueur, et sans santey,
  Je ne scaurois auqun bon oeuvre faire.
  Souhaitez donc fin de calamitey,
  Et que _sus bas_ étant assez punie,
  J'aie ma part en la joie infinie."

The verses are written on a sheet of paper, by Mary herself, in a large
rambling hand. The following literal translation of them was made by a
countrywoman of Mary's, a lady in beauty of person and elegance of mind by
no means inferior to that accomplished and unfortunate princess:

 "Alas, what am I? and in what estate?
    A wretched corse bereaved of its heart,
  An empty shadow, lost, unfortunate:
    To die is now in life my only part.
  Foes to my greatness, let your envy rest,
    In me no taste for grandeur now is found;
  Consum'd by grief, with heavy ills oppress'd,
    Your wishes and desires will soon be crown'd.
  And you, my friends, who still have held me dear,
    Bethink you, that when health and heart are fled,
    And ev'ry hope of future good is dead,
 'Tis time to wish our sorrows ended here;
  And that this punishment on earth is given,
  That my pure soul may rise to endless bliss in heaven."

Immediately before her execution she repeated the following Latin prayer,
composed by herself, {173} and which has been set to a beautiful plaintive
air, by Dr. Harington of Bath:

 "O Domine Deus speravi in te!
  O care mi Jesu, nunc libera me!
  In durâ catenâ, in miserâ poenâ desidero te!
  Languendo, gemendo, et genuflectendo,
  Adoro, imploro, ut liberes me!"

It may be thus paraphrased:

 "In this last solemn and tremendous hour,
  My Lord, my Saviour, I invoke Thy power!
  In these sad pangs of anguish and of death,
  Receive, O Lord, Thy suppliant's parting breath!
  Before Thy hallowed cross she prostrate lies,
  O hear her prayers, commiserate her sighs!
  Extend thy arms of mercy and of love,
  And bear her to thy peaceful realms above."
          _Anecdotes of some Distinguished Persons_,
              8vo. London, 1795, vol. i. p. 154.

H. E.

_Tandem D. O. M._ (Vol. iii., p. 62.)--I would suggest that this
inscription might be resolved into

 "Tandem Deus Otia Misit,"

a thanksgiving for the fulfilment of some oft-made prayer or long-cherished
hope; the idea--if I am right in my conjecture--having probably been taken
from the 6th line of Virgil's 1st Eclogue--

 "O Melibæe! deus nobis hæc otia fecit."

Any accounts that remain of the great Carthaginian Captain's Cornish
namesake, may perhaps tend to show that he had preferred the "otium cum
dignitate" of literary leisure to the turmoil of the battle of life, and to
the use of the _harness_, whether civil or military, that it had forced him
to wear.

C. FORBES.

  Temple.

    [J. V. S. suggests, "May it not in its complete state be 'Tandem Deo,
    Optimo et Maximo,' and its translation, 'When all is done, let praise
    be to God most mighty and most beneficent?'" and X. Z. says, "Possibly,
    'Tandem desiderato opere mactus'--not, I think, a very choice specimen
    of Latinity, but perhaps good enough for a fly-leaf."]

_Tandem D. O. M._ (Vol. iii., p. 62.).--Is not D. O. M. the common
abbreviation for "Deo Optimo Maximo?" and so the whole phrase an
acknowledgment by the painful (and probably pious) collector of the most
interesting library referred to, of his thanks to God on having "_at
length_" obtained possession of some long-coveted folio, or
vainly-sought-for edition?

J. EASTWOOD.

  Ecclesfield.

_D. O. M._--I am emboldened by the Query respecting "Tandem D. O. M. (Vol.
iii., p. 62.) to ask, what is the solution of D. O. M.? On the head of a
tombstone, the inscription is frequent on the continent. I am aware that it
is interpreted "Deo Optimo Maximo" when occurring in the dedication of a
church; but it appears on a tomb to supply the place of our M.S., or the
D. M. of the Romans. Can any of your readers give me the true meaning? It
must be well known, I should think, to all who have studied inscriptions.
As I am indebted to Faber Marinus for an excuse for putting this Query, it
is only courteous to suggest a solution to his D. O. M.--may it be "Datus
omnino Musis?"

[Greek: Ôô.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

To such of our readers, and we believe they form neither the least numerous
nor the least intelligent portion of our friends, who consider the columns
which we devote to _Folk Lore_ among the most interesting parts of our
paper, we recommend an attentive perusal of a little work, which has just
reached a second edition, and which is calculated to invest with fresh
interest that very curious subject. We allude to Dr. Herbert Mayo's volume
_On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions, with an Account of
Mesmerism_. Dr. Mayo's object is "to exhibit in their true light the
singular natural phenomena by which old superstition and modern
charlatanism have in turn profited,--to indicate their laws, and to
develope their theory"--and he does this in a way to excite the reader's
deepest attention, and to convince him that there are more things in heaven
and earth than are dreamt of in his philosophy.

_Daily Steps towards Heaven, or Practical Thoughts on the Gospel History,
and especially on the Life and Teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. For every
Day in the Year, according to the Christian Seasons, with Titles and
Characters of Christ, and a Harmony of the Four Gospels_, is the ample and
descriptive title of a small devotional volume, which has been received
with such favour by all classes of churchmen as to have passed through two
large editions in little more than a twelve-month; which is better
testimony to its merits than any we could give.

Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson will sell on Monday next, and the five
following days, a valuable collection of Books, from the library of a
gentleman in the country, among which will be found some curious early
English Tracts relating to the Church, and some scarce poetical pieces.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of 191. Piccadilly, will sell on Monday, and
five following days, the valuable library of the late Rev. George Innes,
Head Master of the King's School, Warwick; together with the library of a
clergyman.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_Dr. Pusey's Letter to the Lord Bishop of London, in
explanation of some Statements contained in a Letter by the Rev. W.
Dodsworth._

_Directions for the Preservation of English Antiquities, especially those
of the First Three Periods._ By J. Y. Akerman. This little tract, which is
illustrated with numerous woodcuts, has been prepared by the Secretary of
the Society of Antiquaries, in a cheap form (it is sold {174} for a
penny!), that by its wide circulation, especially among agricultural
labourers, it may be the means of preserving many remains of interest. Is
it too much to ask those who approve of Mr. Akerman's object to assist in
its circulation; and to further that object by depositing any articles
which it may be the means of rescuing from destruction either in the
British Museum, or the Museum of the Society of Antiquaries.

CATALOGUES RECEIVED.--B. Quaritch's (16. Castle Street, Leicester Square)
Cheap Book Circular, and Catalogue of Books in all Languages; J. Russell
Smith's (4. Old Compton Street, Soho) Catalogue of Ancient Manuscripts on
Vellum and Paper; Deeds, Charters, and other Documents relating to English
Families and Counties; Hebrew Manuscripts, Autograph Letters, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

  COMENII (JOAN. AMOS) UNIUS NECESSARII, Amst. 1668, 4to.
  ---- DE INDEPENDENTIÂ, Amst. 1661, 12mo.
  ---- RAYMONDI SEBUNDI THEOLOGIA NATURALIS, Amst. 1661, 12mo.
  ---- DE REGULÂ FIDEI, Amst., 1658, 12mo.
  ---- DE NATURA CALORIS ET FRIGORIS, Amst., 1660, 12mo.
  (COMENII (J. A.) SED ANON.) CARTESIUS CUM SUÂ PHILOSOPHIÂ EVERSUS, 12mo.
  RIPAMONTII (JOS.) HISTORIA MEDIOLANENSIS, Mediol., 1648, 5 Vols. fol.
  MARESII (SAML.) ANTIRRHETICON CONTRA J. A. COMENIUM, Groning, 4to.
  ERASTI (THOMÆ) DE AURO POTABILI, Basil, 1578, 8vo.
  ---- DISPUTATIONES DE MEDICINA PHILIPPI PARACELSI, 4 Parts, 4to., Basil,
      1572.
  VARRO (TERENT.) DE LINGUÂ LATINÂ CUM NOTIS G. SCIOPPII, Ingolds., 1665,
      8vo.
  EPISTOLA NOBILISSIMI ET LITERATISSIMI VIRI (i.e. DANL. EREMITÆ) PATAVIO
      AD GASPAREM SCIOPPIUM ROMAM SCRIPTA, 1610, 4to.
  MACRI (NICODEMI) CUM NICOLAO CRASSO DISCEPTATIO DE PARÆNESI CARDINALIS
      BARONII AD REMPUB. VENETAM, Venet., 1607, 8vo.
  POMPOMATII (PETRI) OPERUM NOMENCLATOR EX BIBLIOTHECÂ JO. BOURDELOTII,
      Paris, 1633, 8vo.
  LICETI (FORTUN.) DE PROPRIORUM OPERUM HISTORIA, PATAV. 1634, 4to.
  SCALIGERI (JUL. CÆS.) ORATIO DE OPTIMO DICENDI GENERE CONTRA ERASMUM,
      Lutet., 1537, 8vo.
  PUTEANI (ERYCII) POMPA PROSPHONETICA, Lovan., 1639, 8vo.
  WOTTONI (HEN.) EPISTOLA DE GASPARE SCIOPPIO, Amberg., 1613, 8vo.
  LAVANDÆ (EUGENII) GRAMMATICUS PÆDICUS, 1638, 12mo.
  ---- GRAMMATICUS PALÆPHATIUS, 1639, 12mo.
  ---- NOTÆ ASTRUM INEXTINCTUM, 1641, 8vo.
  SPECTATOR NEWSPAPER, No. 1102. for Sept. 11th, 1847. (Ten Shillings will
      be given for a clean copy.)
  GRETSER (JACOBUS) OPERA OMNIA DE SANCTA CRUCE ACCURATE RECOGNITA MULTIS
      PARTIBUS LOCUPLETATA ET UNO IN VOLUMINE EDITA. Folio, Ingolst. 1616.
  MICHAEL DRAYTON'S WORKS, 4 Vols. 8vo. 1753.

*** Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

M. A. H. "_A Skeleton in every House._" _This saying doubtless had its
origin in an Italian Story. See our Second Vol.,_ p. 231.

L. J., _who inquires about the name_ Rotten Row, _is referred to our Second
Vol._, p. 235.

J. N. CHADWICK. "_A Rowland for an Oliver_" _is explained in our Second
Vol._, p. 132; _and "As Lazy as Ludlam's Dog," which is a kindred proverb,
to his "Lazy as Hall's Dog," in_ Vol. i., p. 475.; Vol. ii., p. 42.

M. R. _The Royal Arms from William the Conqueror (?) to the time of Henry
II. were two lions passant gardant; but Henry II., on his marriage with
Eleanor, added her arms, a lion passant gardant, to his own; making the
three lions, which have continued to the present day to be the insignia of
England. See Parker's_ Glossary of Heraldry.

CHARLES H. MARKHAM. _The figures on the chemist's bottles are the signs
denoting the seven planets, which the alchemist formerly employed in common
with the astrologer. See a curious article entitled_ Astrology and Alchemy
_in the_ Quarterly Review, Vol. xxi. pp. 180. _et seq._

VARRO _is right in his conjecture; and thanked for his kindness and good
wishes. Will he not unmask?_

REPLIES RECEIVED. _Waste-book--Fronte Capillatâ--North Side of
Churches--"Talk not of Love"--Sixes and Sevens--George Herbert at Leighton
Bromswold--Scandal against Queen Elizabeth--Aver--Anticipations of Modern
Ideas--Scaligers--Snail, Snail--Nettle in--Cushion Dance--Shakspeare's
Captious--Sun, stand thou still--Barons of Hugh Lupus--Predeceased and
Designed--The Spider and the Fly--Crede quod habes--Culprits torn by
Horses--"Antony and Cleopatra"--Ballad editing--By Hook or by
Crook--Blunder--True Blue--Steele's Birth-place--Machell's MSS.--Sir Andrew
Chadwick--Gray's Elegy--Crossing Rivers on Skins--Passage in
Tennyson--Jurare ad Caput--Lines on Woman--Chapters in English
Bibles--Dozen of Bread--Cum Grano Salis--Warming-pans--Langholme Fair--The
Fir Cone._

NOTES AND QUERIES _may be procured, by order, of all Booksellers and
Newsvenders. It is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers ought not to experience any difficulty in procuring it
regularly. Many of the country Booksellers, &c., are, probably, not yet
aware of this arrangement, which will enable them to receive_ NOTES AND
QUERIES _in their Saturday parcels_.

_All communications for the Editor of_ NOTES AND QUERIES _should be
addressed to the care of_ MR. BELL, No. 186. Fleet Street.

_Errata._--No. 69. p. 152. col. 2. l. 6., for "_paternoster_, i.e." read
"_paternostreè_"; and in some copies of No. 63, in the last stanza of the
Digby Poems, "Pa_w_ and Ma_w_" had not been corrected, as they should have
been, to "Pa_n_ and Ma_n_."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ADVERTISER is desirous of meeting with a Situation as AMANUENSIS, or
Reader to a Gentleman; or as Secretary, or Librarian, either to a Society,
or a Private Gentleman: or any other situation where Literary Tastes and
Knowledge are required. Unexceptionable reference given. Address Mr. D.
STEVENS, Church Street, Godalming.

       *       *       *       *       *


EVERYTHING FOR THE TOILET at MECHI'S MANUFACTORY, 4. LEADENHALL
STREET.--Superior hair, nail, tooth, shaving, and flesh brushes, clothes
and hat brushes, combs, washing and shaving soaps. Various nail and corn
instruments, razors, razor strops and paste and shaving powder, ladies' and
gentlemen's dressing-cases, with or without fittings, in Russia leather,
mahogany, rosewood and japan ware, ladies' companions and pocket-books,
elegantly fitted, also knitting-boxes, envelope cases, card cases, note and
cake baskets, beautiful inkstands, and an infinity of recherche articles
not to be equalled.

       *       *       *       *       *


Published this Day, 12mo., cloth, 5s.

THE DIALECT AND FOLK-LORE OF NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. A Glossary of
Northamptonshire Provincialisms; Collection of Fairy Legends, Popular
Superstitions, Ancient Customs, Proverbs, &c. By THOMAS STERNBERG.

London: J. RUSSELL SMITH, 4. Old Compton Street, Soho.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOREIGN LITERATURE.

D. NUTT begs to call the Attention of the Public to his Establishment for
the SALE of FOREIGN BOOKS, both Old and New, in various Languages, and in
every Department of Literature. His Stock is one of the largest of its kind
in London, and is being continually augmented by Weekly Importations from
the Continent. He has recently published the following Catalogues, either
of which may be had Gratis, and forwarded anywhere by Post upon receipt of
Four Stamps:--Classical and Philological Books; Miscellaneous German Books
and Elementary Works; Theological, Philosophical, and Oriental Books.

270. Strand (opposite Arundel Street), removed from Fleet Street.

{175}

       *       *       *       *       *


In the Press.

THE THIRD AND FOURTH VOLUMES OF THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND. By EDWARD FOSS,
F.S.A. Comprehending the period from Edward I. to Richard III., 1272 to
1485.

Lately published, price 28s.

VOLUMES I. and II. of the same Work; from the Conquest to the end of Henry
III., 1066 to 1272.

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARNOLD'S DEMOSTHENES, WITH ENGLISH NOTES.

In 12mo., price 4s. 6d.

THE ORATION OF DEMOSTHENES ON THE CROWN, edited, from the best Text, with
ENGLISH NOTES, and Grammatical References. By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER
ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow of Trinity College,
Cambridge.

RIVINGTON'S, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place;

Of whom may be had, by the SAME EDITOR (with ENGLISH NOTES):

1. THE OLYNTHIAC ORATIONS OF DEMOSTHENES. 3s.

2. THE AJAX OF SOPHOCLES. 3s.

3. THE PHILOCTETES OF SOPHOCLES. (In the Press.)

       *       *       *       *       *


HORÆ VACIVÆ.

Just published, in Fcap. 16mo. (printed by C. WHITTINGHAM, Chiswick), price
4s. 6d. bound in cloth,

A THOUGHT BOOK--HORÆ VACIVÆ; or, a Thought Book of the Wise Spirits of all
Ages and all Countries, fit for all Men and all Hours. Collected, arranged,
and edited by JAMES ELMES, Author of "Memoirs of Sir Christopher Wren," &c.

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Just published, in 2 vols. 8vo. price 28s., cloth,

THE SAXONS IN ENGLAND: a History of the English Commonwealth till the
Period of the Norman Conquest. By JOHN M. KEMBLE, M.A., F.C.P.S.

"The work throughout conveys a clearer idea of the life and character of
the Saxons in England than anything we have met with elsewhere. * * * This
account of THE SAXONS IN ENGLAND will indicate its historical and
archæological value; but these are not its only uses. The lawyer will find
in its pages the germs of our common law, especially relating to land; and
the ethnologist or political philosopher will meet with much assistance in
his inquiries into the early social condition of mankind."--_Spectator._

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Will be published, in 8vo., price 3s. 6d., March 1st,

THE NUMISMATIST: A Monthly Publication, exclusively devoted to the familiar
Illustration of the SCIENCE OF NUMISMATOGRAPHY, or that Branch of
Antiquarian Research which relates to ANCIENT COINS and MEDALS. By
MAXIMILIAN BORRELL.

London JOHN HEARNE, 81. Strand; ROLLIN, 12. Rue Vivienne, Paris; BAILLIERE,
New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOWERBY'S ENGLISH BOTANY.

Now ready, Vol. IV. price 1l. 16s. cloth boards.

Vols. I. II. and III., price 1l. 19s. 6d. each, and cases for binding the
Vols. always on hand.

*** Subscribers who may desire to complete their copies can do so from the
stock of the second edition, at Re-issue price.

To be had of Mr. SOWERBY, 3. Mead Place, Lambeth; and of all Booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *


DR. PUSEY'S DEFENCE, OF HIS OWN PRINCIPLES: A Letter to the Bishop of
London in Explanation of some Statements contained in a Letter by the Rev.
W. Dodsworth. By the Rev. E. B. PUSEY, D.D. Third and Cheaper Edition.
18mo. pp. 196. 1s.

Also now ready, 8vo., price 1s.

DR. PUSEY'S RENEWED EXPLANATIONS, in consequence of the Rev. W. Dodsworth's
Comments on the above.

Oxford: JOHN HENRY PARKER, and 377. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FAMILY ALMANACK AND EDUCATIONAL REGISTER FOR THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1851.
Containing, in addition to the usual Contents of an Almanack, a List of the
Foundation and Grammar Schools in England and Wales; together with an
Account of the Scholarships and Exhibitions attached to them. Post 8vo. 4s.

London: JOHN HENRY PARKER, 377. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for March 1851 contains among others the following
articles:--The State Paper Office (being the first of a series of Papers on
the present state of English Historical Literature).--Newly Discovered
Poems by Bishop Hall.--Saint Francis and the Franciscans.--The Glossary of
Architecture.--The Story of Nell Gwyn, Chapter III. (being part of an
original work by Peter Cunningham, Esq., F. S. A., now in course of
publication in the Magazine).--Nineveh and Persepolis restored (with
Engravings).--The Character of Socrates.--Baronial and Ecclesiastical
Antiquities of Scotland (with Engravings).--Seize Quartiers of Queen
Anne.--Notes of the Month.--Review of New Works.--Full Reports of the
Society of Antiquarians and other Archæological Societies.--Historical
Chronicle, and Obituary, including Memoirs of the Duke of Newcastle, the
Countess of Warwick, Lord Viscount Alford, Field-Marshal Grosvenor, William
Holmes, Esq., George Taylor, Esq., of Witton, &c., &c.--Price 2s. 6d.

NICHOLS and SON, 25. Parliament Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


This Day, Part 12, price 9s. plain; 10s. 6d. tinted, Proofs, large paper,
12s.

THE CHURCHES OF THE MIDDLE AGES. By HENRY BOWMAN and JOSPEH S. CROWTHER,
Architects, Manchester.

CONTENTS:

St. Stephen's, Etton, Northamptonshire.--South Elevation.

St. Peter's, Threekingham, Lincolnshire.--Belfry Windows and Lower
Lucarnes, N. E. and W. Sides of Spire: Lower Lucarnes S. Side of Spire, and
1st, 2nd, and 3rd Tier of Spire Lights: Inner South Doorway and North
Doorway: Mouldings, Full Size.

St. Andrew's, Heckington, Lincolnshire.--North Doorway, Nave Piers and
Archmouldings. Caps and Bases, Nave, Transept, Choir and Tower Arches.

To be completed in Twenty Parts, each containing 6 Plates, imperial folio.

"We can hardly conceive anything more perfect. We heartily recommend this
series to all who are able to patronize it."--_Ecclesiologist._

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


This Day, No. 6., price 2s. 6d.,

DETAILS of GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, Measured and Drawn from existing Examples.
By JAMES K. COLLING, Architect.

CONTENTS:

  Doorway from Etton Church, Yorkshire.
  Priest's Doorways from Denton Church, Norfolk, and Higham Ferrers Church,
      Northamptonshire.
  Window from Frampton Church, Lincolnshire.
  Tracery and Groining from Beverley Minster.
  One Compartment of Nave and Label Terminations from St. Mary's Church,
      Beverley.

{176}

       *       *       *       *       *


THIS DAY IS PUBLISHED, FOR MARCH, 1851, Number Nineteen of

John Miller's Catalogue of Books, Old and New,

On Sale at 43. Chandos Street, Trafalgar Square.

THIS SERIES OF CATALOGUES For 1851, CONTAINS

No. 1.

Books on Architecture, Painting, and Fine Arts Generally, Heraldry, Family
History, Poetry, and the Drama.

No. 2.

Classics, Coins, Ireland, Language, Phrenology, Sports and Games.

No. 3.

Bibles and Bible Prints, Manuscripts, Banking & Currency, London,
Shakspeare, History, Chronicles and Divinity.

No. 4.

(_The present list_)

Comprises Books on all the previous enumerated subjects, besides some
highly interesting Pictorial Works, Antiquarian Publications, Club Books,
and an extensive Collection of Miscellanies.

POST OFFICE ORDERS SHOULD BE MADE PAYABLE AT THE CHARING CROSS OFFICE.

A Catalogue is Published Monthly with occasional Supplemental Sheets, and
can be had GRATIS by any Book-buyer, on application to the Publisher. It
will be found to comprise a judicious selection of works in every
department of Literature, in various Languages, Ancient and Modern. Each
Year's Series of Catalogues embrace upwards of 10,000 Distinct Works.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMERICA. Being the Latest and most Accurate Description of the New World,
and the Remarkable Voyages thither, with the Conquest of Mexico and Peru,
by OGLEBY, folio, calf, gilt, illustrated with upwards of 120 fine
engravings, maps, and port., 18s. 6d.   1671.

AN ANALYSIS of the Picture of the Transfiguration of Raffaello Sanzio
D'Urbino, the Letterpress in English, atlas folio, half russia, fine
portrait of Raphael, plate of the Transfiguration, and 17 beautiful
mezzotinto heads, the size of the original picture traced by M. Gauband,
engraved by Godby, 1l. 5s.   1817.

ANNUAL REGISTER (The New), a General Repository of History, Politics, and
Literature from the commencement in 1780 to 1817, 38 vols. 8vo. half
russia, neat, 2l. 2s.   1784-1817.

Comprises the most eventful period of European history.

ARCHÆOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION, The Journal of, from its commencement to January
1850, 20 parts, 8vo. numerous engravings of antiquities, 2l. 2s.   1845-50.

CAMDEN'S (Wm.) Britannia, or a Chorographical Description of Great Britain,
and Ireland, together with the adjacent Islands, Revised and Digested, with
Large Additions, by EDMUND GIBSON, Bishop of Lincoln, 2 vols. folio, calf,
neat, maps of the counties, prints of coins, and port. by White, 1l. 4s.
1753.

CATROU and ROUILLE, Roman History, with Notes, Historical, Geographical,
and Critical, 6 vols. folio, calf, gilt, fine copy, illustrated with
numerous copperplates, maps, and medals. 1l. 10s.   1737.

CHAUCER (Geffrey). The Works of our Ancient and Learned English Poet, with
many Additions, folio, cf. neat, black letter, port., 1l. 5s.   Islip,
1598.

DART'S History and Antiquities of Westminster Abbey: an Account of its
Ancient Building, Altar, Reliques, Customs, Saxon Charters, &c., Lives of
the Abbots, &c., 2 vols. folio, nearly 200 fine engravings, with all the
arms of the subscribers, calf, gilt, fine copy, 1l. 11s. 6d.   1720.

DART (J.) History and Antiquities of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury,
and the once Adjoining Monastery, folio, calf, neat, fine plates, 1l. 1s.
1726.

DAVENANT (Sir William), The Works, now first collected and published from
the Original Copies, folio, calf, gilt, fine copy, port., 14s. 6d.   1673.

DRYDEN'S (J.) Comedies, Tragedies, and Operas, 2 vols. folio, calf, neat,
good copy, with the fine portrait engraved by Edelinck, 12s. 6d.   1701.

ENGRAVINGS after the Best Pictures of the Great Masters, with Descriptions
in French and English. Large atlas folio, elegantly half bound, morocco,
gilt edges. 20 fine plates, 2l. 12s. 6d.   1844.

FAULKNER'S Account of Chelsea, 2 vols. 8vo. large paper, proof plates, each
leaf separately and neatly inlaid in royal 4to. for illustrating, only 1l.
5s.   1820.

QUARTERLY JOURNAL of Science and Art, edited by BRANDE, at the Royal
Institution of Great Britain, from its Commencement in 1816, to its
Conclusion in 1831, complete in 32 vols. 8vo. bound in 16, half calf, very
neat, numerous engravings, 2l. 15s.   1816-32.

ROY'S (Le) Military Antiquities of the Romans in Britain, and their
Particular System of Castramelation, illustrated from Vestiges of the Camps
of Agricola, &c., published by the Society of Antiquaries, imp. folio, 51
fine plates, half bound, morocco, 1l. 10s.   1793.

SHAKSPEARE, The Works of, collated and corrected by the Former Editions by
MR. POPE, 6 vols. 4to. calf, gilt, a very neat copy, port., 2l. 2s.   1725.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE SOCIETY OF ARTS, from its Commencement in 1768 to 1831,
forming 44 vols. very neatly half bound in calf, uniform, the rest unbound,
in all 48 vols., illustrated with numerous portraits and plates, 2l. 12s.
6d.   1768-1826.

WALPOLE'S (Horace) History of the Royal and Noble Authors of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with a List of their Works, enlarged and continued
to the present Time by T. PARK, 5 vols. 8vo. 150 fine original and very
brilliant impressions, elegantly bound in russia, marble edges, 3l. 3s.
1806.

JOHN MILLER, 43. CHANDOS STREET, TRAFALGAR SQUARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, March 1. 1851.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 70, March 1,
1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***

***** This file should be named 23204-8.txt or 23204-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/0/23204/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
