The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Cabin on the Prairie, by C. H. (Charles
Henry) Pearson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Cabin on the Prairie


Author: C. H. (Charles Henry) Pearson



Release Date: May 18, 2009  [eBook #28870]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CABIN ON THE PRAIRIE***


E-text prepared by Roger Frank and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 28870-h.htm or 28870-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28870/28870-h/28870-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28870/28870-h.zip)





THE CABIN ON THE PRAIRIE

by

DR. C. H. PEARSON

Author of "Scenes in the West," Etc.

ILLUSTRATED







[Illustration: CAPTURE OF THE FAWN. Page 20]



Boston:
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by
Lee And Shepard,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court
of the District of Massachusetts.




TO

MY SISTER,

WHOSE SPIRIT HAS JUST GONE FROM PRAIRIE-LIFE

TO THE HILLS OF PARADISE,

I INSCRIBE THIS BOOK.

C. H. PEARSON.




A FRONTIER PROPHET.

INTRODUCTORY.


"If you stay here long, you will become so Westernized that you will
lose all love for New England. That's my experience." So said a brawny
pioneer, a man of large mind, and generous heart, and a sledge-hammer
fist that never struck a coward's blow; but when swung in defence of
the right was like "the jaw-bone" of Samson to the Philistines. He had
emigrated from Maine twenty years before, and was one of the first
settlers I met on the prairie near the scene of my story. Was his
prediction fulfilled? Ah, how like sweetest music sounded the bells of
Salem (city of peace) the first Sunday of my return to the Old Bay
State! Besides, the frontiersman misrepresented himself. For, seated
by his ample clay-stick-and-stone fireplace, how his eye kindled, and
tones mellowed, as he treated us to reminiscences of his early days!
And what a grip he gave the hand of a freshly-arrived Yankee!

Then there were those east who said, "You will soon tire of the West."
They, also, were mistaken. An invalid, with shadowy form and trembling
limbs, when I left New England, I awakened to a new life in Minnesota.
"Take a gun on your shoulders, kill and eat the wild game of the
prairies," said my medical friends. I anticipated vicissitude and
deprivation in following such counsel; but these toughened my weak
frame, and added zest to frontier labors and pleasures; for I was soon
able to do a man's share of the former, and in threading forest and
prairie I was brought into delightful nearness to nature in its
beauty, freshness, and magnitude, and in visiting the lodge of the
Indian and the cabins of the settlers I met with plenty of adventure.

In writing this work, I have, with peculiar interest, lived over the
scenes and incidents of my varied frontier experience; have travelled
once more amid the waving grasses and beckoning flowers; heard again
the bark of the wolf, and the voices of birds; felt on my brow the
kiss of the health-giving breeze; worshipped anew in the log-cabin
sanctuary. Yes, East and West are both dear to me. One fittingly
supplements the other. Each holds the ashes of kindred. By a singular
providence, since this tale was completed, a much-loved relative, one
of the gentlest and most self-sacrificing whose presence ever
glorified the earth, has found a resting-place in the bosom of the
very prairie I had in mind while penning these pages. Sent west by
physicians to save her life, she reached that spot in time to die,
thus attaching my heart to that soil by another and sorrowful tie.

That East and West may be bound together by love, as well as by
national and commercial relations, and that this story may tend in its
humble way to so happy a result, is the earnest wish of

                                                           THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                                          PAGE
      I. The Pioneer Family.--A Spirited Chase.                      9
     II. Shooting Double.--A Frontier Doctor.                       23
    III. Where Can He Be?--A Heart Revelation.                      35
     IV. A Brush With Indians.--A Black Heart.                      47
      V. Brother Smith and Quarter Stakes.                          65
     VI. Mrs. Jones's Story.--The Gray Wolf.                        79
    VII. A Sabbath on the Prairie.                                  93
   VIII. Tom's Victory.                                            105
     IX. A Surprise.                                               116
      X. "No Whiskey at This Raising!"                             126
     XI. Old Mrs. Skinflint in Trouble.--Lost in the Woods.        142
    XII. Fire and Flood.                                           158
   XIII. The Indian Lodge.                                         170
    XIV. The War-Song.                                             187
     XV. The Massacre at Spirit Lake.                              194
    XVI. A Beleaguered Cabin.                                      210
   XVII. The Mysterious Fire.                                      226
  XVIII. The Boy in the Tree.                                      237
    XIX. Bub's Broadside.                                          250
     XX. Long Hair.                                                260
    XXI. "Pull the String, Bub."                                   272
   XXII. Tom and the Money-Lender.                                 285
  XXIII. An Enchanting Scene.--The Parting.                        295




THE CABIN ON THE PRAIRIE.

CHAPTER I.

THE PIONEER FAMILY.--A SPIRITED CHASE.


"There, the last hill is dug, and I'm glad!" and Tom Jones leaned on
his hoe, lost in thought.

He was a stout lad of sixteen, with frowzy brown hair, crowned by a
brimless straw hat, and his pants looked as if they had been turned
inside out and outside in, upside down and downside up, and darned and
patched and re-darned and patched again, until time, and labor, and
cloth enough, such as it was, had been used to fabricate a number of
pairs of pants. As for boots,--for his lower extremities were not
wholly destitute of protection,--they might have come down to him as
an heir-loom from a pauper of a preceding generation. But what
mattered it to him that his clothes were threadbare, many-hued, and
grotesque? or that his boots let the deep, rich soil in at sides and
toes? Was he not a "squatter sovereign," or the son of one, free in
his habits as the Indian that roamed the prairies of his frontier
home? He had not heard of "the latest fashion," and paid no attention
to the cut of his garments, although, it must be confessed, he
sometimes wished them a trifle more spruce and comfortable. His home,
as I have hinted, was on the prairie. Nevertheless, the family domain
was an unpretending one. Less than an acre, fenced in the rudest
manner, enclosed the "farm and farm buildings," the latter consisting
of a small log house and log pigsty, the cabin, at the time our sketch
opens, being, it is evident, at least two seasons old--a fact which
serves to show the more plainly the poverty and thriftlessness of the
inmates; for they have had time, certainly, to cultivate quite a tract
of the easily-tilled land, had they enterprise and industry. But they
belonged to a class not famous for these virtues--the restless,
ever-moving class that pioneer the way towards the setting sun. But
perhaps we are leaving the boy propped too long on his hoe. Let us
take a more critical look at him. "Fine feathers don't make fine
birds," observes the old proverb. Forgetting the dress, then, please
study his face. A clear, deep-blue eye, delicately-arched eyebrows,
regular features, mouth and chin indicating decision and native
refinement, and a well-developed forehead. Ah, here may be a diamond
in the rough! Who knows?

The squatter's son looked about him with a dissatisfied air. "I do
wish," he soliloquized, "that I could see something of the world, and
do something for myself. Here we've been changing around from one
place to another, doing nothing but raise a few potatoes and a little
corn, living in a miserable cabin, where there are no schools, and
scarcely any neighbors. It's too bad to spend all our days so. I
believe we were made for something better; and, as the minister told
us Sunday, we ought to try and be somebody, and not float along as the
stick on the stream. I'm sure it isn't, and never was, to mother's
mind; and, as to father--" And here he stopped and pondered, as if
trying to solve a mystery, and in a style that would have been
pronounced philosophic, had he been a college professor--scratched his
head. Then, with his ragged sleeve, he wiped the sweat from his brow,
leaving a streak of black that made that part of his face present
quite a different appearance from what it did, reader, when you and I
noticed it a moment ago. And going to the cabin, he returned with a
rickety basket, and, commencing at the lower end of the field, began
picking up the potatoes that had been left drying in the sun. A
goodly crop had the little patch produced; for the vegetable decays
and fertilizing rains and snows of centuries had covered the prairie
with a dressing with which art could not compete, and it was more
difficult not to get a harvest from the seed sown than to get one. The
rows of hills were covered with the bountiful returns brought up to
the light of day by Tom's well-used hoe. It was not, however, the
size, quality, or number of the potatoes that most interested Tom just
then. The fact that they were all out of the ground; that the corn was
cut and stacked, and the pumpkins ready to be housed; that the fall
work could be finished by that afternoon's sun-setting,--stirred him
strangely; for he had of late begun to question the future, to learn
what it had in store for him. He had come to realize, in a degree,
that that future would be very much what he chose to make it. And
serious dissatisfaction with the past and the present filled his heart
with disquiet.

Tom's memory had been active for a few days. How like yesterday it
seemed, when he was a little child, and his father, getting together
money enough, bought a horse and wagon, and, putting the family in the
vehicle, started out prospecting for a new home farther from the
advancing waves of civilization! How many similar expeditions had
they taken since, and how painfully had their experiences illustrated
the saying, "A rolling stone gathers no moss"! But roll Mr. Jones
would. Tom knew this too well. It was, indeed, viewed in one aspect,
an easy way to get on, this going in one's own conveyance from place
to place of Uncle Sam's unsettled lands; this living off the country,
gypsying in the woods and on the prairies; this two thirds savage and
one third civilized mode of putting a growing family through the
world; and if you were to see Mr. Jones seated in the emigrant wagon,
reins in hand and pipe in mouth, or with shouldered rifle on the track
of a deer, you would say that such a life was eminently agreeable to
him. Every man is made for something; and you would say that he was
cut out for a wandering frontier loafer, who gets his subsistence by
doing the least possible work in the easiest possible manner, and
hunting and fishing. A horse and wagon, or extemporized log cabin, for
a shelter; tools enough for the simplest tilling of the soil, and
furniture for the rudest housekeeping and clothing; the making over,
by the industrious wife, of clothes bought "some time back,"--such was
the way the Joneses lived. Putting up a small log house by the bank of
a river for the sake of the fish, and near a forest for the game, with
"a strip of clean prairie" for "garden sarce,"--there they might
remain for a year or two; then you would be quite sure to find the
immigrant friend looking discontented, and expressing a wish to "sell
his claim."

"It's growing so crowded with folks coming into the country, I can't
go three miles without stumbling against a shanty or a house; and cart
tracks are getting so plenty, I can't stand it. I must pull up stakes,
and go farther on to find a place to breathe in."

And, perchance, realizing a trifle for his claim and improvements,
Dobbin is hitched anew into the crazy old wagon. The broken crockery,
and leaky black tea-pot, and ancient cooking-stove--the pipe of the
latter running up through the wagon-top--are once more aboard, wife
and children packed in, and the uneasy frontiersman is pushing out
again towards solitude.

Tom had been reviewing this bit of family history more in detail, and
much more vividly than we have now done. The result was a feeling of
disgust, and a resolution to break away from such a life, and an
endeavor for something higher.

But what had brought the squatter's son to such a conclusion? The
condition of the family had for some time been unsatisfactory to Tom.
Though brought up in this roving, improvident way, his better nature
often revolted against it; not, however, so strongly and decisively
as now. Still, desires, and even longings, for something better had
flitted through his mind, only to make him moody and irritable.
Doubtless these aspirations were due, in no small measure, to his
mother--a woman much superior to her condition, but who, clinging to
her husband with a pure and changeless love, accepted the privations
of her lot without a murmur. Taken by her marriage from the comforts
and advantages of a good home, she had followed his fortunes "for
better or for worse," having much more of the latter, in a worldly
point of view, than the former. Not that Mr. Jones was a hard or a
dissipated man; but his roving habits, and the deprivations and
poverty they endured, had made her days sad and toil-worn.

Tom, in his tastes, was like his mother. But a new event had recently
occurred. A godly minister, in search of the lost sheep of the
heavenly fold, had made his way into the region, and, the Sabbath
previous to the opening of our sketch, had, in earnest, eloquent
words, preached the gospel to the settlers. The log cabin, in which
the services were held, was only a mile and a half distant, and Tom
and his father, with the neighbors generally, attended. How
differently the gospel message affects different persons! Some are
softened, others are hardened, by it. Some are stirred up to certain
duties, while, under the same sermon, others are incited to an
entirely different train of thought and course of action. The effect
on Tom of the sermons of the preacher was to incite his feelings to
revolt against his lot in life, and arouse him to the necessity of a
purpose in living. He did not look forward so much to the world to
come as to the "to come" of this world. The present in its relations
to life here--this was the point with him; and he revolved the
subject, viewing it in every possible light, until a decision was
reached.

"This preacher," said he, "is from a region of schools and privileges.
Why can I not seek such advantages, and be somebody, and accomplish
something? Why can I not go to the city to school this winter?" What
an idea for him! It almost took his breath to think of it. And, then,
how should he get there? Where was the money coming from to support
him while studying?

"I must work and earn it," he replied. "I can do anything honest; I
can, at least, work for my board."

Tom's mind had suffered from a famine of knowledge. He could read
passably well, write a little, was good at reckoning, and the little
he knew excited a craving for more. Public addresses had always moved
him deeply, and the living truths of the gospel, as presented by the
living preacher, had set the mental machinery in motion, until the
decision to go from home in search of an education, had been wrought
out; and it was this rising purpose that kept him so patiently at his
day's task of finishing up the fall work, that he might commence his
new career.

"I will finish getting in the crops by dark," said he, as he filled
the basket, "and then there will be nothing to keep me at home;" and
he was about raising the basket to his shoulder, when he was startled
from his reveries by a loud cry of,--

"Tom, Tom! come quick! I've caught a fawn, and he'll get away!" It was
twelve-year-old Charley from the hazel bushes that bordered the
potato-patch near the woods. Tom ran to assist his brother, but could
scarcely believe his eyes when he saw the little fellow had caught the
fawn by the tail, and was struggling to hold the agile creature,
forgetting how dexterously the deer can use his heels. Scarcely had
the elder brother mounted the fence, when, with a smart kick, the fawn
sent Charley over on his back, and leaped into the enclosure. At this
instant a bevy of flaxen-haired urchins, hatless, bonnetless,--Tom's
brothers and sisters,--came whooping from the cabin, and joined the
chase. In a moment Tom had forgotten all his gloomy thoughts and high
resolves, and was as eager as any of them, as they tried to secure the
nimble prize. A lively time it was, too; fear and speed against
numbers, noise, and strategy. A good force were the pursuers; the
"olive plants" of the Joneses grew very naturally in regular
gradations, like the steps of a flight of stairs. Tom, Eliza, Charley,
Bob, Sarah, Bill, and Bub, the four-year-old, were all active with
hands, legs, and lungs, while the mother stood in the doorway,
surveying the scene, with baby in her arms.

"Fix up the fence where the deer jumped in!" cried Tom to Charley; and
the latter hastened to repair the breach, for the brush had been
broken down at that point.

From corner to corner and side to side bounded the deer, slipping
through the fingers of one and another of the youngsters; but they
gave him no rest.

"Stop him, 'Lize! Hold him, Bob! Head him off. Say! Get out of the
way, Bub! There! why didn't you catch him, Charley? Mother, can't you
put down baby, and help us? He'll get away! There! he's going over the
fence! No, he isn't!" Amid such vociferations the children rushed on,
pell-mell, till out of breath. Luckily, the brush fence was so thick
and high, being made of dead trees piled upon each other, that the
animal could find no point to push through or scale, especially while
kept in "running order" by his pursuers. Although thus imprisoned, he
was baffling their efforts, refusing to be captured, when Tom said to
the children,--

"We can't catch him this way. But if you will all do as I tell you, I
guess we can." The fawn was standing in the further corner of the
field, as if waiting to see what they would do next. And Tom, ranging
his force in line, himself at the head, gave the word to advance
towards the deer.

"Steady, steady," said he, as they neared the animal. They had
succeeded in approaching within a few yards, and Tom, with outspread
arms and eagle eye, advanced slowly, watching to seize him if he
should attempt to spring away, when little Bub, who had been sent into
the cabin by Tom, having gone around unobserved on the outside of the
garden behind the deer, suddenly ran a sharp stick through the brush
into the creature's back, saying,--

"I make 'im wun!"

Frantically jumped the deer at this--a _denouement_ so unexpected to
his assailants, that the line became broken, the little soldiers were
tumbled together, with Tom on top of them, and the deer stood almost
at the same instant at the other end of the patch, the whole being
accomplished with marvellous quickness.

"Get off my head!" screamed Sarah from under the heap.

"O, dear, you'll break my arm!" cried Eliza.

"What did you fall on me for?" angrily demanded Bob of Charley, as he
spit the dirt from his mouth. "You did it on purpose--you know you
did!"

"No, I didn't!"

"Yes, you did!"

"I should a thought Tom might a held the deer, an' not fell on us so
heavy," sobbed Sarah, rubbing her eyes with her begrimed gown.

But while they fretted, the fawn had been critically examining the
fence to find egress, seeing which the children dried their tears, and
made for him again; and at length the graceful creature, bewildered by
the din, and foiled by numbers, was forced to surrender himself after
another vigorous scramble, in which the basket of potatoes was
overturned, and the corn scattered in delightful disorder, and was
borne by Tom in triumph to the cabin, accompanied by the excited
group.

"We've got him, marm--we've got him!" they shouted in chorus as they
followed their leader into the house.

"And where will you keep him to-night?" she inquired.

"He tan seep with me!" promptly answered Bub, at which there was much
merriment.

"No," replied Tom, shaking his head at the mischief-maker, "you will
stick a stick into his back, and 'make 'im wun' again."

After much deliberation it was decided that the fawn be tied to a
bed-post, while a pen was built for his accommodation near the cabin.
This was soon accomplished, and the fawn placed in it.

When Tom returned to his work, the day was far gone. He gazed around
with regret as he saw that not only was it now too late to finish
getting in the crops, but that the chase of the deer, in which he had
engaged with so much ardor, had made him no little extra labor. What a
task it would be to find all the potatoes, scattered and trampled into
the rich earth as they were! and the bundles of corn had been broken
from their bindings, and must be gathered together and refastened. To
find and carry in the potatoes consumed the time till supper; and
then, at his mother's call, he went in depressed and unhappy, and
after bringing in the wood for the breakfast fire, and feeding the
pigs, he went up the rude ladder to his straw bed on the floor.

It was scanty fare that the Jones family had. You could see that by
their looks. It is true that they were healthy and strong; but they
lacked the fair, plump development that plenty of food of a suitable
variety gives to childhood and youth. Of vegetables they were not
destitute; potatoes, corn, beans, and pumpkins they had in abundance
since fall set in, if not before. Bread, milk, and meat were usually
scarce with them. For the latter they depended principally on the
father's rifle; but as he was apt to take wide and eccentric tramps
over the prairies, there would be long intervals when but little game
from his gun made savory the family cooking.

Mr. Jones had been away for some days now, and his patient wife had
really suffered for food. Vegetables of the same kind, served up
pretty much in the same way, with little to give relish to them, a big
crying infant the while tugging at her breast, and the house-work to
do, it is not strange that while the children, fresh from romping in
the bracing prairie air, were favored with a ravenous appetite, she
had little. Tom understood all this; for, constituted like her, he,
too, felt the deprivations of the table, although in a less degree,
and much did he worry about her meagre diet.

"Ah," he thought, as he lay down for the night, "when I am away and
earning, won't I send the good things to mother!"




CHAPTER II.

SHOOTING DOUBLE.--A FRONTIER DOCTOR.


Tom slept soundly, and notwithstanding he charged his memory to awaken
him before daybreak, dawn was brightening the east while he was still
in the shadowy land of dreams. The low attic had no window, save a
pane of glass nailed over a hole under the eaves; and long the lad
might have slumbered on, had not a loud sound suddenly aroused him.

"Does it thunder?" he exclaimed, fearing a prairie tempest had arisen
to interfere with his cherished project of leaving home.

Peering through the window pane, he saw, to his surprise, that the
morning was cloudless. What could it mean? Assuredly he had heard the
rolling of thunder! He looked out again, for another and more
agreeable thought had struck him.

"Yes, it's the hens!" he ejaculated; "my! what a heap of them!"

By "the hens," he meant prairie hens; for in this familiar way they
are spoken of at the west. They had spied out the corn, and the fact
that it was there, by some telegraphic system in vogue among the
birds, had spread for miles around; and making their way through the
tall grass from every direction, at once, as the sun appeared, they
flew in a huge body over the little cabin into the field. For this
species of grouse (_Tetrao cupido_) are models of good order and
punctuality as to their meals, and many an _eastern_ boy or girl
might, we suspect, get a useful hint from them on table etiquette.
They assemble, as if by appointment, around the farmer's grain-field,
and quietly wait for the breakfast signal, which is the rising of the
sun, then enter the enclosure together, and having fed just one hour
by their unerring chronometer, they retire, to return at sunset for
another hour's feeding. This was their first visit to Mr. Jones's
patch; doubtless the trampled and scattered corn had tempted them in
now.

Tom's eyes danced for joy, as, peeping at the hens, he hurried on his
clothes. Hundreds were there pecking along like so many turkeys. It
was the combined whirr of their wings that woke him so effectually;
many an older person on the frontier has been deceived by the same
sound, supposing it to be thunder, so heavy a noise do these wild fowl
of the prairies make when numbers of them fly together.

"Won't mother be glad!" he whispered to himself; "and what a dinner
she'll have to-day!" And descending the ladder, he took from the
hooked pegs overhead his father's old shot-gun, where it had hung
unused for months, and from a little box some powder and shot, and a
percussion cap; then loading in haste, he rested the weapon on the
window-sill, that he might take steady aim, and fired at the fowl. A
terrible report followed, and Tom came to himself to find his mother
bathing his forehead, and his sisters crying. The gun was out of
order, and, being also overloaded, had blown off the lock, burning his
face, and stunning him by the recoil.

Poor Tom returned to consciousness to suffer. His face began rapidly
to swell, and presented a frightful appearance, so blackened was it by
the powder, and the smarting was intense. Mrs. Jones, in her isolated
life, had been too many times thrown on her own resources to be wholly
overcome by the disaster. Her chief anxiety was lest Tom's eyes were
destroyed, as the eyebrows and eyelashes had been completely burned
off by the explosion. When she saw, however, that he was not blind,
she said, with tears,--

"O, how glad I am, dear child, that your eyes are spared!"

A couple of miles away lived a doctor,--or an individual who wore
that title,--on whom, in emergencies, the scattered settlers were
wont to call. This queer Æsculapian specimen was remarkably tall and
lank, always went with his pants tucked in the tops of his thumping
cowhide boots, and wore a red woollen shirt, the soiled and limpsy
neck-band of which, coming nearly to his ears, served instead of a
collar. He dwelt alone, with his cat, in a rude, claim-shanty,
sleeping with his window open and door unfastened; and if his
services were needed in the night, the messenger would put his
head in at the window and call to him, or pull the latch-string
and walk in. The doctor was pompous in conversation, and affected
long words; but it was understood--unfortunately for his
patients--that his advantages had been poor.

For this worthy Charley had been promptly despatched by his mother;
and good time did the child make, so frightened was he about poor Tom.
He was an imaginative lad, and, when much excited, apt to see "two
hundred black cats fighting in the yard," when there was only a
frolicsome kitten chasing its tail; and at such times he had the bad
habit of running his words together. He was just the one to send on
the errand, so far as speed was concerned; but when he burst into the
doctor's cabin, shouting,--

"Blews-sed-off! blews-sed-off!" the slumbering man of herbs
prematurely awakened, rubbed his forehead, to be sure he was not
dreaming, and stammered,--

"Wha-wha-what's to pay?"

"Blews-sed-off! blews-sed off!" reiterated the urchin.

"Boy," said the doctor, now fully aroused, "be self-possessed and
collected, and state distinctly what has happened." And holding the
lad by the shoulders, he added, "Speak very slowly, that I may
understand you!"

"Blew--his--head--off!" emphatically repeated Charley, pausing after
each word.

"A shocking occurrence, truly!" ejaculated the physician. "I do not
wonder, boy, that one so unaccustomed to such sanguinary events should
be terrified. But who is the unfortunate victim of this tragical and
fatal accident--or was he murdered in cold blood?"

"Yes, sir," replied Charley, who, in turn, did not understand the
doctor, but supposed he must assent to all he said.

"Yes--what?" sharply asked the physician. "Was it, I say, an accident,
or was the man assassinated? Be quick, now!"

"Yesir!" instantly screamed Charley, thinking the doctor was now
reproving him for speaking slowly.

"Well, you _are_ scared out of your seven senses, you wretched dunce!"
retorted the doctor, out of temper; and, shaking the lad, he said,
"See if you can tell me now who it is that's killed."

"It's our Tom!"

"And how do _I_ know who your Tom is?" roared the physician. "There's
_my_ Tom;" and he pointed to a monstrous gray cat that sat on an oak
chest watching the boy with green-glaring eyes; "and if he should
mistake you for a thieving gopher some fine morning, and eat you up
alive, small loss would it be to the world, I'm thinking!"

"He's my brother!" timidly interposed Charley, keeping to the
question.

"Your brother! Well, old hunter, what do you say to that?" said the
doctor, stroking his disagreeable pet: "that dirty-faced, uncombed,
ill-dressed ignoramus of a boy claims you for a relative. Do you
realize the honor, eh?"

"I mean that _our_ Tom is my brother," explained Charley, bursting
into tears.

The doctor, softened by his distress, asked more gently,--

"But hasn't your Tom any other name?"

"No, sir," answered the boy.

"Well, what is _your_ name?"

"Charley."

"Charley what?"

"Charley Jones."

"O, I see! you belong to the Jones tribe; not much matter if all their
heads were blown off. But what do you want of me?"

"Mother wants you to come right down quick, and make Tom well."

"What! after his head's blown off? That's a job, anyhow. Nice-looking
young man he'd be--wouldn't he? going round, well as ever, without any
head on his shoulders. But I see how it is: his head isn't all
gone--just a trifle left--enough to grow another with;" and the
doctor, now in good humor, succeeded in drawing from the lad an
intelligible account of the accident, and mounting his horse, with
saddle-bags behind him, and a tin pail in his hand, he proceeded to a
well-to-do settler's, and narrating the accident with nearly as much
exaggeration as did little Charley, he added, with an emphatic jerk of
his collar, "I'll fix the fellow up so that he'll be as good as new."
He then begged some yeast, and a roll of cotton batting, and,
repairing to the Joneses, covered Tom's face with the cotton dipped in
the yeast, and returned to his loggery. Whether the application was in
accordance with the _Materia Medica_ of orthodox practice or not,
after a short time the pain subsided, and Tom dropped into a peaceful
sleep; seeing which, Mrs. Jones went about her morning's work with a
thankful heart. The children had had nothing to eat as yet, and now
that their brother's moanings had ceased, they realized that they were
hungry.

"Tan't I have my supper?" sobbed Bub, clinging to his mother's dress
as she walked.

"'Tisn't supper; it's breakfast!" answered Bob, giving the child a
push, which helped him cry the louder.

"Cry-baby cripsy," mocked Bob, making ugly faces at the little fellow;
for fasting had made Bob quarrelsome.

Sad-eyed Mrs. Jones tried in vain to quiet them, carrying and nursing
baby and preparing the meal at the same time, for even the older
children were cross as unfed cubs. Mrs. Jones was no disciplinarian;
she was too broken-spirited to command her offspring; if she ruled at
all, it was by affection and tact. In this instance she set the older
ones at work. One she directed to replenish the fire, another to wash
the potatoes, a third to sweep the floor: a slow job the latter was,
as the "truncheon," or floor of split logs, was jagged, and the broom
worn nearly to the handle. She suggested to Charley to see if the fawn
had got away, which had the effect of causing Bub to go on the same
mission. This stratagem, however, did not avail much in the case of
Charley, who quickly saw through his mother's device, and returned,
exclaiming,--

"Pooh! I guess the fawn's all right!"

But Bub found congenial occupation in teasing the fawn. The pen was
narrow; and Bub, not being able to reach the deer, and tired of
shouting at him, started off into the field for a famous long stick
which had served him for a steed the day before. As he looked for it
among the corn, he saw something flutter, then heard a curious cackle.
It was a prairie hen, whose wings had been broken by shot from Tom's
gun. The bird moved painfully away, trying to hide behind the leafy
stalks. But Bub's bright eyes could not be eluded, and he followed
after, calling, "Chick, chick, chick!" mistaking it for a domestic
fowl. The cunning bird dodged in and out among the standing and
prostrate stacks with marvellous swiftness, considering its condition;
but persevering curly-pate seized the hen at last by the neck, saying,
exultantly,--

"I dot yer; now you 'have!"

The strong wild fowl struggled desperately, scratching his chubby hand
until it bled; but Bub trudged on with his prize into the cabin,
saying, as he entered,--

"See, marm! I totched a biddy!"

The little captor's entrance was greeted with shouts of delight on the
part of the children, and by a loving kiss from his mother; for Bub
was a great favorite, and a manly wee boy, despite his loud-lunged
blubbering, in which he excelled on occasions, and his mischievious
pranks, in which also he was the equal of Bubs of more civilized
communities. As he stood in the cabin door, coolly holding the kicking
prairie hen, heedless of its cruel claws, his torn and soiled
baby-frock surmounted by a round fat face, bright blue eyes, and light
hair falling in tangled ringlets, the golden sun resting upon his bare
head and lighting up his dimpled cheek, he formed a picture worthy the
pencil of an artist.

"What a little man you are!" exclaimed the mother, taking the heavy
fowl from him. "You shall have some nice breakfast for this!" and she
put a baked potato and a piece of corn-cake on the corner of a trunk,
and while Bub with a satisfied hum partook of the food, she quietly
slipped out of doors and wrung the hen's neck.

The children plied the little hero with questions as to where and how
he caught the hen, which he took his own time to answer while he
munched. Then they rushed out in a body, hoping to find another. Their
search was successful, and they brought back two, which they found
lying some distance apart, quite dead. The old gun had "scattered"
prodigiously, but, as the flock of hens was so large, did good
execution, as appeared from the result.

Tom was asleep on his mother's bed,--which occupied a corner of the
one room,--but, aroused by the din which greeted Bub when he came in
with the "biddy," regarded the affair quite complacently, although he
said nothing. And as the hens were being picked by 'Lize and Sarah,
he was comforted by the reflection that his well-meant attempt at
gunning had brought the family something to eat. Tom, indeed, had
never seen fowl prepared for the household under just such
circumstances, and he watched each step in the process with peculiar
interest. Mrs. Jones, with a fond mother's quickness, understood well
how he felt, and, though she seemed not to notice him, made unusual
parade in all that was done.

"Be very careful of those feathers, girls. Why, how thick and soft
they are! We'll save every one; and who knows but when Tom gets well
he'll contrive some traps and catch hens enough to make a pair of
pillows, or a feather-bed?"

"Is a feather-bed very nice?" asked Sarah.

"Very, when the weather is cold, and a body is weakly, as Tom is now;
it's so easy to rest upon. There, Eliza, you may pass me the one that
is picked, and I'll dress it. How fat it is! and so tender! What a
feast we shall have! How thankful we ought to be that Tom's eyes were
not put out when he shot these hens! How good he was to think of
getting them for us! I hope, girls, you'll help him all you can, when
he gets about, and not let him do all the chores."

Mrs. Jones was very handy at such work, and she took care to face the
bed so that he might see every part of the operation.

"There's the heart, and there's the liver--sweet as a nut!" and she
smelled of them with the air of an epicure. "We must keep them by
themselves for the present." Then, deftly jointing the fowl, she put
the parts to soak in cold water, strongly salted. "That will take out
the _wild_ taste," said she. "How I do wish Tom could eat some of this
when it is cooked, it will be so strengthening! But I guess, if
nothing happens, the doctor will let him have a taste to-morrow!"




CHAPTER III.

WHERE CAN HE BE?--A HEART REVELATION.


"Where can he be?" sighed Mrs. Jones, as she looked anxiously out of
the little cabin window. Many times a day had she done the same, save
that she _thought_ the question, but did not utter it, as now. Her
husband had been away for more than a week, and no tidings from him.
What could it mean? When would he return? Had any evil befallen him?
These and similar inquiries were continually arising in her mind,
filling her with disquiet. She was one of those singularly-constituted
persons who are given to presentiments, and who, when they are under
the spell of a deep, controlling conviction that something unusual is
to transpire,--a persuasion that comes to them, not through reason or
evidence, or the probabilities of things, but, as some express it, "as
if a voice had spoken to them" when no human being was near, or by a
secret whispering to the soul by some unseen and seemingly superhuman
authority,--when she had such a presentiment it never deceived her.
For some time she had foreboded trouble. The foreboding grew upon her
till its dark shadow cast a gloom upon all her feelings; it thrilled
her at times with fear. She would start at the veriest trifles, as if
affrighted. Particularly at night did she cower under the feeling, and
of late it had been hard for her to sleep; and when she slept, it was
wakefully: often would she start up, and look around to see that all
was right, then fall asleep again. And yet she did not apprehend
danger to herself particularly. Sometimes she feared for her husband;
but the growing feeling was, that trouble for the settlers was at
hand, and a terrible fear of the Indians rested upon her.

It was far into the night now, and the lone watcher felt too uneasy to
retire. The moon shone with great brilliancy, and she sat without a
light, busying herself with some coarse sewing. The children were
peacefully sleeping, and not a sound was to be heard save their
breathing, and the whisper of the wind outside. The silence was
painful to her, and she arose and peered out of the window again.
Everything looked weird and ghastly. What a solitude! For miles over
the smooth prairie not a human habitation was to be seen. In the other
direction stood the mysterious forest. How black and dismal seemed the
trunks of the trees in the shimmering moonbeams! She gazed timidly at
their indistinct outlines, with strained eye.

"How foolish I am!" she murmured; but, as she turned from the window,
her attention was fixed once more upon the forest; for it seemed to
her that a dark object moved along its outskirts. "It's only the
trees!" she said, striving to reassure herself.

But in a moment more an ox appeared; then a dark figure followed, and
another, and another, walking in single file. As the strange
procession emerged more fully into view, she saw that the forms behind
the ox were those of Indians; they were driving off the settlers'
cattle. As their route lay near the cabin, fear that they would pay
her a visit, for a moment quite paralyzed her. It was but for a
moment, however; the instinct of the mother was roused. Her children
might be murdered. She glanced again at the advancing savages, and
then, softly opening the door,--which, fortunately, was on the other
side of the cabin,--she returned with the axe, the only weapon of
defence at hand, and, with flashing eyes, and a deadly resolution
depicted on her face, which seemed turned to marble, silently awaited
the onslaught. But the savages, in their soft moccasins, glided
noiselessly by, like so many snakes. They did not appear to notice the
cabin, and were soon out of sight. When they were gone, Mrs. Jones
sat down, feeling as weak as before she had felt strong. The reaction
was too great, and, a faintness coming on, her head sank upon the side
of the bed where Tom lay. This aroused him, and he called,
repeatedly,--

"Mother! mother!"

"Hush," she whispered, at last; "they'll hear you!"

"Who?" whispered Tom, alarmed.

The mother kept perfectly still, listening intently, until satisfied
that the danger was really past; then she related to her son what she
had seen, and what her fears had been.

"But, mother," said Tom, confidently, "there are no signs of trouble
from them. They wouldn't dare to attack the settlers; for they have
always been beaten by the white man. Besides, there are not many near
us. You see that these have not harmed us; they only stole an ox. Why,
mother, don't you know that there has been no Indian war for a good
many years, and that the Indians have been growing weaker and weaker
all the time, and going farther and farther off?"

This was plausible; and Tom only expressed the views of the settlers.
Mrs. Jones knew that there was no reason for her anxiety, except her
fears, and she had not ventured to express them to any one before;
for she was aware, such was the prevalent feeling on this subject,
that it would expose her to ridicule. But now she only shook her head,
and said,--

"I wish your father was safe at home."

"Why, mother, you don't worry about him--do you?" exclaimed Tom, in
amazement. "The Indians always liked him, and he can go anywhere over
the prairies and through the woods without guide or compass, and not
get lost. And he's a great marksman, you know: it wouldn't do for an
Indian to get in the way of his rifle."

"But, Tom," said the mother, taking his hand, and suddenly changing
the subject, "why is it that you don't get better faster? Your skin is
real hot, and you look feverish. The doctor said you ought to have
been out before this." Tom looked down, but did not reply. "Tom,"
continued she, tenderly, "something is troubling your mind. I have
known it for some time. Don't you love your mother well enough to make
her your confidant? What is the matter, my son?"

Still the lad did not reply; but his heart was deeply moved by this
unexpected and loving attack upon the citadel that held his secret
secure, as he had supposed. Soon the tears began to stream from his
eyes, and he sobbed aloud.

Mrs. Jones's eyes closed, and her lips moved as if she were in
prayer; upon which Tom, after she had ceased, asked, softly,--

"Mother, are you a Christian?"

"That is a serious question, my son," said she. "I sometimes hope that
I am one; but it is a great thing to be a true follower of the Lord
Jesus Christ. But why do you ask?"

"O," replied he, embarrassed, "I don't just know why. I know you're
_good_ enough to be a Christian; but you never spoke to us children
about it, and--I didn't know what to think."

Mrs. Jones seemed pained by the answer, and said,--

"Tom, I know I have been negligent in this matter." Then she added,
hesitatingly, "But your father does not feel as I do about it; and I
have scarcely felt like instructing the children contrary to his
views. I have ever tried to please him in everything; perhaps I have
carried this too far."

"Mother, were you praying just now?"

"Yes," said she, hesitatingly.

"And were you praying for me?"

"Yes, my son."

Tom was silent for a while, and then said,--

"Mother, since I heard the preacher, I have many times wished I were a
Christian; that is, if--if--the Bible is true. But there are some
things that I don't understand, and they are right in my way."

"What are they, Tom?" He colored, and said,--

"I don't like to tell you, for I am afraid you will think me very bad.
But I thought some time I would like to ask some one about it who
knows more than I do. You believe that there is a God, mother?"

"With all my heart."

"And that he is pleased with those who do good, and angry with those
who do wrong?"

"Certainly, Tom."

"Well, it seems hard, if this is true, that he should let me get hurt
so the other morning, as I was trying to shoot the hens for you, and
you needed them so much, when there's Jo Priest, and ever so many
more, swearing, ugly fellows, that go a gunning almost all the time,
and kill things just for the fun of it, and they get plenty of game,
and never get injured;" and the lad spoke bitterly.

"My child," said the mother, "there are many things hard to be
understood about God's dealings with us, and I am afraid that a great
part of them seem harder than they really are, because we are so
ignorant. But you know how I am situated. I don't hear any preaching,
nor see those that do, very often; and it's not to be expected that I
can clear up these things, as they can."

"I wish," interrupted Tom, petulantly, "that the preacher was here.
I'd like to ask him; but perhaps he wouldn't like to talk with a poor
ignorant boy like me."

"Well," continued the mother, "I know _here_"--and she placed her hand
upon her heart--"that all God does is just right, however dark it
seems, and that satisfies me."

Tom was impressed by his mother's faith, but soon objected,--

"Mother, do you think we can always trust our feelings? You said a
little while ago that you _felt_ that there would be trouble with the
Indians; but nobody expects that. And now you say that you _feel_ that
all God does is right. Now, if you are wrong about the Indians, and
about father's being in danger from them, how can you be sure that
your feelings are right about God?"

"Tom," replied she, "I have a great many impressions that come to
nothing. But there are _some_ that _never_ do. And I _know_ that God
does right; for I _feel_ that he does; and, Tom, we shall see about
the Indians;" and she sighed heavily, and rose, and gazed long and
earnestly off over the prairie, and towards the woods. Then, seating
herself on the bedside, she said, gently,--

"My son, you haven't told me all your troubles yet. Hadn't you better
hold nothing back from me?"

The lad turned away at this, deeply touched again; "for," thought he,
"her feelings are right about me; perhaps they are about God;" and her
persevering and delicate solicitude pierced his very soul.

"Mother," said he, at length, struggling with emotion, "I don't want
to grow up ignorant and useless. And I don't want the children and us
all to be so poor and despised;" and the tears came again, and the
mother's mingled with his. "I can't bear to have it so, and I
_won't_," he added, rising in bed, and speaking with excited energy.

"Ah, my poor child," said the mother, "I knew it was that that lay on
your mind, and took away your appetite, and made you so unhappy. And I
have been praying for a long while that you might feel so."

"You didn't want me to be miserable--did you, mother?" asked Tom, in
surprise.

"God forbid, Tom. But I couldn't wish you to grow up contented with
such a life. I have felt that you might do a great deal of good in the
world, and I wished you to see it."

"But, mother, how can I have things different?"

"Tom," returned she, looking searchingly at him, "how have you thought
to make them different?" The boy averted his face again, and made no
reply for a moment, and then said, softly,--

"I had decided to go away and get learning, and earn my living, and
try to be somebody."

"And when did you think of starting?"

"The morning," answered he, with an unsteady voice, "that I got hurt
with the gun."

"And were you going off without letting me know it, Tom?"

"Yes, mother; but I expected to write back, and tell you all about
it."

"Tom," returned the mother, tenderly, "you asked me, a little while
ago, why it was that God let you get hurt that morning when you were
trying to kill the hens for the family, while those bad boys go
uninjured. I believe God's ways were right in this. Why, my dear
child, you are better to me, and more necessary to me, at present,
than many prairie hens; and you might have harmed yourself more by
going from home than you were by the powder. You meant it well, Tom;
but you reasoned about going away, just as you reasoned about God's
dealings with you, _like a child_. Tom, you are necessary now to my
comfort, and perhaps my life. I am not over strong, and any great
trouble might be too much for me. I am afraid nights now, but I feel
safer when you are here. And you help me a great deal about house, and
in the care of the children. Your father is away so much I have to
depend on you. And what if, when you are away, the cabin should take
fire,--and you know our stove is none of the tightest,--or if we
should have trouble with the savages? And who would get the wood up
for us during the cold winter that is coming? God took too good care
of us, Tom, to let you forsake us that morning. Besides, Tom, you
wouldn't have succeeded."

"Why not?" asked Tom, faintly.

"You hadn't decent clothes to go in, nor any recommendations. Your
life had been very different from that you proposed to enter upon, and
you hadn't a cent of money to help you on your way. The chances were,
that you would have suffered, and, instead of helping us, as you do
now, you would have been a source of sorrow, anxiety, and expense to
us. Is it not so?" Tom saw that his mother understood the case; but
his heart sank as his air-castle fell, and he wept anew. "But do not
misunderstand me, Tom, as you did God's dealings with you. What I say
brings to you a great disappointment. It seems almost cruel in me thus
to cut off your hopes of being something better in the world. Tom, it
does not follow, because you were going too soon, and God permitted an
accident to stop you, that the time may never come for you to realize
your hopes so far as they are right. You say you wish to be useful.
You _are_ useful now, very useful. Be contented to help at home for
the present, and God will, I doubt not, open something better for you
in his own good time." And, kissing him, she lay down upon her bed for
a short nap before the day should break.




CHAPTER IV.

A BRUSH WITH INDIANS.--A BLACK HEART.


"Hello! Let me in, I say. Are you all dead?" and a strong hand shook
the door.

Mrs. Jones rubbed her eyes, for she had overslept herself; and as the
children depended on her to awaken them in the morning, they were
sleeping too. Hastening to the door, she undid the fastening, and her
husband entered.

"Is that you, Joseph?" she asked.

"It isn't anybody else, I reckon," he gruffly answered; "but where
shall I put this?" taking a quarter of venison from his shoulder,
which his wife hung against the wall on a wooden peg.

"I'm glad you've got back, Joseph."

"Well you might be, for you came near never seeing me again."

"I hope you haven't met with any mishap," said the wife, anxiously.

"Nothing to speak of, only a scratch from the bullet of one of them
rascally red-skins."

"Why, you haven't been fighting with the Indians--have you?"

"Not exactly," he answered; "I've always treated them well; but after
this, if any of 'em get in my way, I shall pop at 'em before they do
at me; that's all."

"But how did they happen to shoot at you?" asked Mrs. Jones.

"Well," said her husband, "just give me something to put on my side,
for it's a grain sore after my long tramp, and cook us a venison
steak, and I'll tell you all about it;" and Mr. Jones, pulling open
his hunting-shirt, showed an ugly-looking flesh wound in his side.

"Dear me, Joseph, you _are_ hurt," said the wife, as she carefully
bandaged it, putting on a simple salve, which she always kept on hand
for family use. "You look tired and pale--bringing home such a load,
and bleeding all the way. Sit down, and I'll get you something to eat
directly."

Scarcely had he seated himself, when there was a cry of pain from Tom,
and Bub came tumbling head first upon the floor; for, having seen his
father, he had scrambled, without ceremony, across Tom's sore face,
and receiving a push from the latter, landed upon his nose.

By this time the rest of the children were awake, and shouting, "Dad's
come home!" while Bub bellowed at the top of his lungs, "My nose
beeds! my nose beeds!"

"O, no, it don't," replied his mother, soothingly.

"Well, it feels _wed_, it does!" he answered, determined to be
pitied.

This remark elicited peals of laughter from his brothers and sisters,
which Bub taking as insults, he roared the louder.

"Children," cried Mrs. Jones, "stop laughing at Bub."

But he cut too comical a figure for them to stop at once, for, as he
had used, the night before, one of Tom's old shirts for a night dress,
he now found it difficult to move towards his father, as each time he
stepped the garment would trip his feet.

"Children," interposed Mr. Jones, "why don't you hush. Your marm's
spoken to you a number of times already."

At which Bub added with dignity, as he tried to balance himself,--

"I des they're _blind_, they're so hard o' hearin'!"

"Your father," said the mother, impressively, "has been shot at by the
Indians, and came very near being killed, and you ought to keep more
quiet."

"Did they kill you, daddy?" asked Bub, who now stood at his father's
knee, his blue eyes wide with wonder; "tause, if they did, I'll stick
my big stick into their backs."

There was a suppressed tittering at this, for which the children felt
half ashamed, considering the startling intelligence they had just
heard.

"Mother was afraid you'd have trouble with the Indians," observed Tom,
"and she was so much worried that she didn't sleep last night."

"Why, the Indians haven't been doing any mischief about here--have
they?" asked his father.

"No," replied Tom, "and I told mother that there wasn't any danger."

But the venison was filling the cabin with its savory smell, and Mrs.
Jones said,--

"Hurry, children, and get washed and dressed for breakfast."

And going to the basin, which was in its place on the wash-bench
outside the door, with much discussion as to who should have the first
chance, hands and faces were treated to a hasty bath.

Mr. Jones was about forty-five years of age--a short, thick-set man,
with dark hair and heavy beard. He was a man of much natural ability,
and exhibited singular contrasts in character and speech. The free and
easy carriage, and quaint language of the "Leather-stocking," sat
easily upon him; and yet, at times, he would express himself in words
well chosen, and even elegant. He hated society, and was despised by
the settlers for his lack of enterprise; and yet, when circumstances
drew him out, they were wonder-struck at the variety and accuracy of
his information. These inconsistencies made him a mystery; and he was
looked down upon, and looked up to, as his neighbors came in contact
with one of the other side of his characteristics. In all, too, that
pertained to the habits of the animals, and the appearance of the
country, no one was so well posted as he. He was built for physical
endurance, was cool and courageous in danger, but could not confine
himself to regular employment, bodily or mental.

"Isn't Tom coming to breakfast?" inquired Mr. Jones, as the rest of
the children were greedily helping themselves from the plate of meat.

So the mother related how Tom had been hurt, and then said,--

"But you haven't told us how you received your injury?"

"Well," said Mr. Jones, as he pushed away his plate, having satisfied
his appetite, "I had started for the lake, hearing that there was a
good many wild geese and other sorts of game there, and the prospect
was, that we should make a pretty big thing of it; but the afternoon
after we reached the pond, and was looking about a little, Davis and I
were crossing a prairie, and had come in sight of a grove, and says I
to him, 'You just go round on the other side of the thicket, and I'll
go in on this, and if there's any deer in there, one of us'll start
them out.' Well, I'd got within a few yards of the trees, when, the
first I knew, I heard the crack of a rifle, and a bullet came singing
through my side. Says I to myself, 'That's a red-skin's compliments!'
and making believe that I was a gorner, I pitched forward and lay
still as a door nail, in the tall grass. I hadn't lain there more 'n a
minute, when, sure enough, a red-skin popped out from behind a tree
close by, and made for me, to take my scalp. I had my revolver ready,
and when he was within a few feet of me, I just let daylight through
him; and as he fell, not knowing how many more of the scamps might be
about, I dragged myself along to the side of the lake, where I found
Davis waiting for me,--for he had seen the whole thing,--and creeping
around to the other side under the banks, we made tracks for home. Why
under the sun the feller didn't put the bullet through my heart, I
can't make out, for I never knew one of 'em to miss, when he was so
near as that, and had a fair aim."

Mrs. Jones then knew why her heart was so burdened on his account at
the very hour of his marvellous escape from death.

But their conversation was interrupted by a settler who called to ask
if they had seen anything of a stray pair of cattle.

"Ah, neighbor Allen, is that you?" said Mr. Jones, going to speak to
the caller, who sat upon his horse before the door.

"Ah, Jones, when did you git back? and what luck?" rejoined the
horseman in a hearty way.

"Got a taste of venison," replied Mr. Jones, "and had a brush with the
Injins."

"Ah, ha! the red scamps want to smell powder again--do they? Well, I'm
ready for them, for one, and I have seven boys not an inch shorter
than I am, and as good with the rifle as the best, who would like a
sight at the varmints. But if none of your folks have seen any stray
cattle about the diggins, I must be going. Fact is, I reckon they've
been driv off by some thievish villain."

"What sort of cattle were yours?" inquired Mrs. Jones.

"One was red, and the other was a brindle."

"Was the red one very large, with very wide-spreading horns?"

"That's the ticket," said the man.

"I saw such a one last night, going down that way, by our cabin."

"You did? Was Brindle follerin'?"

"No," replied she, "but some men were driving him."

"They were Indians!" cried Tom, excitedly.

But Mrs. Jones fell to scraping the tin pan she held in one hand, with
a case-knife, and drowned his words, so that they did not hear, while
she motioned to him to be silent.

The caller sat thinking a moment. His hair was silver-white, but his
face was youthful and ruddy; and his massive, well-knit frame
indicated remarkable physical strength. He was a bold and athletic
man, skilful with the rifle, and a lineal descendant of the
revolutionary hero whose name he bore, and whose fighting
characteristics were reproduced in him.

"What time was the ox driv by?" he asked.

"About twelve, I should think," said she.

"Were the men afoot?"

"Yes."

"Well, they'll have to travel fast to git away from me! And if I catch
'em--" But the remainder of the sentence was lost in the distance, for
the old man had already touched the trail of the stolen ox, and,
dismounting, examined carefully the ground, then fiercely shouting,
"Indians!" drove on at full speed.

When he had gone, Mr. Jones turned to his wife, and asked,--

"Did you _see_ the men that driv the ox?"

"Yes."

"Why on earth didn't you say so, then?"

"Husband," said Mrs. Jones, "the trouble will come soon enough; and I
was hoping Mr. Allen would never find out who took his cattle. If he
shoots one Indian, it will bring hundreds of them upon the
settlements, and we shall have dreadful times!"

"Fush!" returned the husband; "Allen is good for a dozen Indians, and
there are plenty more of us to help him. But don't you be scared; the
red-skins know us too well to risk a fight. They'll only prowl around
and steal a little beef, and shoot at a fellar unaware, from under
kiver--that's all they'll venter on--you can depend on that!" Then he
took down his rifle, cleaned and loaded it, and saying, "I guess I'll
go along a piece; perhaps Allen'll come across the varmints afore he's
aware," with a quick step he was soon hidden from view.

The news of the accident that had happened to Tom, and that Mr. Jones
had been shot at by the Indians, spread rapidly, with many
exaggerations; for the inhabitants of a new country, being mutually
dependent, feel a special personal interest in whatever befalls each
other. Besides, there are not such distinctions as obtain in the old,
settled portions of the country, and they become well acquainted with
one another's affairs. Moreover, the doctor, as he went his rounds,
gave a flaming account of the injury that his patient at the cabin had
sustained, and painted in glowing colors the magical effects of his
professional services. If he did not assert in so many words that
Tom's head was actually blown from his body, and that he replaced it
so that it was on better than before, he gave the impression that
something as extraordinary had been achieved by his medical and
surgical skill. And through the day quite a number called to satisfy
their curiosity, or show their sympathy. It proved, therefore, quite
an occasion for the Jones children, and they feasted their eyes and
ears to their hearts' content. As for the mother, weary of the
unwonted interruptions, and wishing to commune with her own heart, she
willingly bade the last visitor "good by," and, calling Robert, she
directed him to bring in some wood and make a fire, that she might fry
some cakes for tea. Robert proceeded with alacrity to do this, the
other children helping him in the task, the prospect of the cakes
being the quickening principle. Robert filled the grate with dry wood,
and, proceeding to light it, the room was soon dense with smoke. This,
however, was no new experience, as the blackened walls of the cabin
testified. But soon the smoke had measurably cleared away, and the
tea-kettle sent up volumes of steam, and Mrs. Jones, taking some meal
from her frugal stock, poured boiling water upon it, and added some
salt. Then putting on the griddle some deer fat, she put the dough in
large iron spoonfuls into the sputtering grease.

"Your father will relish these," said she to the children, who stood
in solid ranks around the stove, watching her with interest. And
having taken off the last cake, she set the heaping plate in the open
oven to keep warm till her husband came.

"I guess pa's coming now," said Sarah, who, anxious to get to eating,
had looked out to see if he was in sight. "No; it isn't he, either; I
don't know who it is. How nicely dressed he is!"

At the latter exclamation the family urchins rushed in a body through
the door, upsetting Sarah in their eagerness to see the wonder.

A gentlemanly, middled-aged man in black, with gold spectacles and
pleasant countenance, approached.

Accustomed to the plainly-attired specimens of humanity that do the
hard work of the frontier, the children, overawed by his appearance,
shrank behind cabin and pigsty, in spite of his kindly invitations to
stay, where they peeped at him in open-mouthed astonishment.

"Mrs. Jones, I presume," said he, bowing, as, abashed, she answered
his polite rap on the door-frame.

"Yes, sir," she replied, wondering how he knew her name.

Entering, without being asked,--for Mrs. Jones was too confused to
think of it,--he said,--

"I heard that your son had met with an injury, and as I was looking
up children for the Sabbath school we are to organize next Sunday, I
thought I would step in and see how he was, and how many of your
little ones could attend."

"It is the missionary," whispered Tom, as his mother nervously
smoothed the bed-clothes.

The good minister heard the remark, and not appearing to notice the
mother's embarrassment, stepped to Tom's side, and in a way that made
both mother and son feel at ease, said,--

"I hope you are not seriously hurt, my lad."

"No, sir," replied Tom, grateful for his thoughtful kindness. "My face
was burnt pretty badly by the powder; but it's nearly well now, and
the black is coming off nicely."

"How did you contrive to get hurt so, at this season of the year? Boys
sometimes get burned with powder on Independence Day. I once met with
such an accident myself."

"How did it happen?" Tom ventured to inquire, for he loved dearly to
hear a story.

"It was when I was about fourteen," replied the minister. "I was a
wide-awake little good-for-nothing, and had for some weeks saved up my
pennies to celebrate the Fourth with. I bought me a half pound of
powder, and a little iron cannon, on wheels, and, as you may believe,
anticipated a jolly time. I had decided, the night before, to commence
the day with a grand salute; and that it might produce the greatest
effect, I crept softly down in my stocking feet, by my parents'
bed-room into the front hall, before daylight, and having loaded my
little gun to the muzzle the evening before, I touched it off. It made
a great noise, I assure you--all the louder, of course, because it was
in the house; then, slipping on my shoes, I went into the streets,
leaving the old folks to go to sleep again if they could. My first use
of the powder, you see, did no harm to me, unless it made me careless.
When I got into the street, I found crowds of boys and men were there
before me, making all the noise they could, firing off crackers,
pistols, and guns, and making the foggy morning air resound with the
music of tin horns and drums. Meeting a boy with a large horse-pistol,
I bought it of him at a foolishly high price, and banged away with
that till breakfast time. At the eastern extremity of the city, where
I then lived, was a high hill, called Munjoy, on which the soldiers
were to encamp that day; and after eating a hurried meal, I went
there. Scores of white tents were pitched, occupied by men who sold
all sorts of tempting eatables, while thousands of men, women, and
children walked about. It was an exciting scene to me. The hill,
indeed, was a glorious spot, for it overlooked the city on the one
side, with its thousands of buildings and shaded streets, and on the
other the harbor, with its shipping and wharves, and lovely islands,
while the ocean stretched away as far as the eye could reach."

"I never saw the ocean," interrupted Tom.

"Well, I will tell you what it resembles. You have looked for miles
and miles over the prairie--I mean a _rolling_ prairie, that in gentle
swells of land extends till the sky shuts down upon it?"

"O, yes," answered Tom.

"Well, imagine that prairie turned to water, so deep that you could
not touch bottom with the longest line you ever saw,--the ocean would
look so; only remember that it is always in motion--ebbing, and
flowing, and roaring, and dashing against the land and the rocks, its
waves sometimes running very high, topped off with a white foam."

"O," said Tom, earnestly, "if I could only once see it!"

The minister studied Tom's expressive face a moment, and then said,--

"Perhaps you may, some day. But I was going to tell you how I got
hurt. I had exploded all the powder, and was about tired of the
pistol,--for you know such things don't satisfy a great while, after
all,--when I came across some boys who were making volcanoes.
Volcanoes, you know, are burning mountains. They took some powder, wet
it, worked it with their fingers into miniature hills, then put one
end of a strip of match-paper in the top of each, and lighted the
other end of the paper; this would burn slowly down into the top of
the powder-hill; that would take fire and send up showers of sparks
for quite a while, as it gradually consumed. This amusement fascinated
me. So, buying a quarter of a pound of powder, I made a hill like
those I had seen, and lighted the match-paper as I saw them light
theirs; but when it had burnt all away, the hill did not burn.
Thinking, therefore, I had put too much water in mine, I stooped down
and poured on from the paper some dry powder. In an instant it ignited
from a smouldering spark, exploding also the contents of the paper
which I held in my hand. My face was dreadfully burned, and became as
black as a negro's."

"So did mine," said Tom; "but it is coming off nicely now."

"So I see," returned the minister, laughing; "and I dare say you
worried almost as much about the _black_ as you did about the
_burn_."

"Tom feared it would never come off," said the mother.

"Ah, that's just the way I felt. But I have found out since that
there's something worse than a black face."

"What's that?" asked Tom.

"A black heart!" replied the minister.

"A black heart!" repeated Tom, in doubt of his meaning.

"Yes, my lad. What I mean is a heart blackened by sin. Ah, if folks
worried more about _that_, and less about their looks, how much more
sensible it would be!" Then, after a pause, he said,--

"But there is one thing for which we should be very grateful; and that
is, that as there are remedies for us when we injure the body, and
disfigure it,--as we did our faces, my son,--that can heal the injury,
and bring the skin out all fresh and fair, so there is a great
Physician, who can heal the hurt which sin has done our souls, and
cause them to be pure and white forever. Isn't that a glorious
thought?"

"Yes," whispered Tom, weeping.

"Yes," ejaculated the mother, with deep emotion.

"But," said the minister, "how many of these little folks"--for most
of the children had ventured in, and stood listening spell-bound to
his recital--"will come to Sunday school next Sunday?" And getting a
promise that as many of them would be there as possible, he took
leave, saying he hoped to call again soon.

The children's hearts were taken captive by their clerical visitor.
And well it might be so, for he was their true friend. And it
mattered little to him that their dwelling was rude and comfortless,
their clothing old and worn, and their manners uncultured. He loved
them for his Master's sake, and for their souls' sake: for this he had
left the elegances of his eastern home, and come out into the
wilderness. He was a true man, and a true minister of Jesus
Christ--seeking not a name, wealth, luxury, the favor of the rich and
great, but to bring the straying lambs and sheep into the fold.

"I think we won't wait any longer for your father," said Mrs. Jones,
after the children had got somewhat over the excitement caused by the
missionary's call; and putting her hand into the oven to take from
thence the plate of cakes, she looked in to see why she did not find
them, exclaiming,--

"Why, where are the cakes? I certainly set them in here. Who has taken
them away?"

The children gazed at each other in consternation.

"I'll bet it's some of Bub's doings," said Eliza; and noticing for the
first time that he was not in the room, they hastened out to find
him.

"Bub, Bub!" called the mother.

"Bub, Bub!" echoed the children, as they searched the field over, and
looked into every nook and corner that they could think of. But there
was no answer, and not a trace of him was to be found, until, at last,
Charley called out,--

"Here's his stick!"

"He cannot be far off, then," said his mother, although she began to
grow uneasy about him.

"No," said Robert, "for he rides that stick most all the time:" then
he suddenly added, "Ah, you little rascal! I see you!" Then turning to
the rest, he whispered, "Just look here, but don't make any noise!"

And Mrs. Jones and the children, gathering softly around the pen,
peeping in, saw Bub, comfortably seated by the fawn, the cakes in his
lap, eating them and feeding the gentle creature. Bub had teased the
fawn the most, and Bub was the first to tame it.

[Illustration: BUB AND THE FAWN. Page 64.]




CHAPTER V.

BROTHER SMITH AND QUARTER STAKES.


"Good morning, Mr. Jones. I suppose we may call this Indian
summer--may we not?" and the missionary--for it was he--shook hands
with the hunter.

"Scarcely time for it yet," replied the latter. "But this is fine
weather, though."

"Shall you be busy to-day? I wish to find a good quarter section of
land on which to put up a house. I have been thinking that as I have
never pre-empted, and have therefore a right to do so, I may as well
do it."

The hunter laughed scornfully, and said,--

"Good many folks about here pre-empt more than once."

"But that is illegal," replied the minister.

"They don't stand about that."

"But they are obliged to take oath at the Land Office that they have
never availed themselves of the privilege."

"And they take it."

"But they perjure themselves in doing so."

"Yes."

"Well," said the clergyman, with a sigh, "I can't understand how a
person can break the laws and take a false oath for the sake of a
little land."

"Nor can I," replied the hunter, almost fiercely; "and I makes no
pretensions to _piety_, either. I pre-empted once, and afterwards sold
out; and I hev moved about considerable sence; but I have never
cheated government out of a cent yet--nor anybody, as to that. I don't
own nothing here; this is government land that my cabin sets on, and
if it was put up for sale to-day, by the proper authorities, I
couldn't say a word if it was sold, improvements and all. I have to
take my risk, and I'm contented to, rather than own the biggest farm
out doors, and get it by lying under oath. No; they calls Joseph Jones
a worthless dog, and _I_ don't say he isn't; but let me tell you,
neighbor, that I haven't it on my conscience that I went into the Land
Office and lifted up my right hand, solumly promising to speak the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and then, when I
knows that I have pre-empted once, or maybe a number of times, swear
that I never hev--as some of your praying, psalm-singing folks has!"

"Do I understand you to say, Mr. Jones, that professing Christians
living about here have done this?"

"That's _just_ what I say," replied the hunter; "and I have as much
respect for sich whining hypercrites as I have for a hissing adder:
that's why I never took much to meetin's, I suppose. What I gits, I
gits honest--don't I, pet?" and he caressed his rifle as if it were a
living thing, and understood what he said. "I brings home what the
good Lord sends inter the woods an' over the prairies fur me. 'The
cattle upon a thousand hills are his'--that's Scripter, I believe; and
it means, I take it, that the deer, and the elk, and the bear, and the
geese and the hens, belong to _him_: nobody ken say, '_I_ owns them
all,' and keep them for his own use; and when Billy, here,"--patting
his gun,--"brings down a fat buck, we feel _honest_ about it--don't
we, Bill? 'Tisn't like standing behind the counter with a smerk on yer
face, as yer cheat in weight an' measure, or sell sanded sugar for the
genuine. Many an' many's the time I've known this done, by them that
lives in fine houses, and wears fine clothes, an' goes reg'lar to
church; an' if they passed Joseph Jones, wouldn't deign to speak to
the old hunter. Not that I care about that; I don't deign to speak to
them; and if heaven is for _them_, I had just as lieves stay a while
outside, for they an' I could never git along together here, and we
couldn't be expected to there. But did you want anything perticular of
me?"

"I was told," said the missionary, "that none of the settlers
understood so well about the land, and where to find the section and
quarter section stakes as you; and I thought, if it wouldn't be taking
too much of your time, that perhaps you would show me around a
little."

"Nothin' would suit my feelings better," said the hunter. "Was there
any perticular direction you wish to go to?"

"Brother Smith tells me that here is a fine quarter section still
unclaimed;" and the clergyman took from his note-book a
roughly-sketched map of the vicinity, purporting to show what
was taken up and what was not.

"Did he give you _that_?" asked the hunter, as he ran his eye over the
paper.

"Yes; as looking up land is new to me, I was thankful to get some sort
of a guide," replied the missionary.

"I don't see much to be thankful for on that drawin'."

"Why, isn't that quarter section free?" inquired the minister,
perplexed.

"Yes; an' we'll go an' see it. But are yer goin' afoot?"

The missionary replied affirmatively.

"You'll never stand it in the world, to hunt up land in that way--too
much ground to go over. Wife," he added, putting his head in at the
door, "you jist entertain the minister, while I see if I ken scare up
a team fur him."

Mr. Jones strode off as if he had a congenial errand to do, and
striking a "bee line" across the prairie, over a river, through a
grove, halted before a cosy cottage that would remind one of New
England. The acres and acres of tilled land stretched away from the
dwelling, enclosed in the most substantial manner, and sleek cattle,
that fed in the rich pasture, bespoke competency and enterprise. He
stopped not to knock at the door, but entering, asked of a lady who
sat sewing'--

"Is yer husband about, Mrs. Lincoln?"

"Yes; he's in the other room. I'll speak to him."

And in a moment the robust form of the owner of the farm appeared.

"How are you, Jones?" he said, in an offhand way.

"O, I'm nicely. I called on an errand fur yer minister, that you've
invited to settle among us. He wants a spot for a cabin,--like the
rest of us, I suppose,--and Smith has told him to look at the quarter
section way over there, a mile and a half beyond Clark's; you know the
place. I jist want to git your team and take him over in a good,
Christian way, and not let him travel his legs off, so that he can't
preach to us sinners next Sunday."

Mr. Lincoln had been foremost in urging the missionary to cast in his
lot with them, and no one had made more promises of material aid than
he. He was sincere in this, and was really a generous man, but
exceedingly careless. He had been told that the minister was going to
look up a claim; but it had never occurred to him, until now, that the
preacher had no other conveyance than his feet, and that to walk over
the prairies would be a toilsome and time-consuming task. Slapping his
caller on the shoulder, he said,--

"Glad to see you interested, Jones; and to encourage you, I'll harness
right up, and you may take the span."

The nimble-footed steeds were soon in the buggy; and the hunter,
having taken the preacher aboard, was, in good time, pointing out to
him the boundaries of the claim. It was a lovely spot,--like many such
in Prairiedom,--and the hunter took care that it should be seen to
advantage. On a gentle swell of ground was a small gem of a grove,
commanding a view of the rest of the section. The fall flowers,
many-hued and bright-eyed, nodded gayly in the tall grass; a natural
spring, bursting from the hillock, wound its way along till lost in
the distance; the sun was pouring down its rays from a sky
fleecy-clouded and soft. How could the preacher, with his pure tastes
and cultivated love of the beautiful, help being delighted with the
scene?

"This is delightful!" he exclaimed. "I'll build my cottage right here
by the side of this spring, and my tilled land will always be in
view."

The hunter had anticipated his decision, and dryly observed,--

"It wouldn't be no sich place as yer ought to hev."

"Why not?" asked the minister, smiling.

"Do you reckon on keeping a horse?" asked the other.

"No; I couldn't afford that."

"How, then, are you goin' to git to yer appintments, an' to visit the
sick an' the dyin', from this pint? And you'll never farm it much; the
land looks nice and slick as a gentleman's lawn: this is one of the
Lord's lawns, neighbor; but 'twasn't made for you to live on. Don't
you expect to hev no evenin' meetin's? You can't hev them out here
where there's no live critter but the prairie hins, and maybe in the
winter a stray wolf or two. You're a _perfessional_ man, and it's
necessary for you to be right among folks, and not livin' off one
side, like as if you wanted to keep out the way of company."

This rugged, common-sense way of putting things was quite effective,
and the missionary said,--

"You are right. But what can I do? By this chart I find that there is
little vacant land about here, and I am unable to purchase an improved
farm at the prices at which they are held."

"You don't mean to settle down on _this_--do ye?"

"That is out of the question."

"Well, Joseph Jones isn't of much account, but if he don't show you a
bit of land that's been left for jist sich as you, then I lie like
that lying chart," he said, angrily. And motioning the preacher to
resume his seat in the buggy, the hunter drove back for some distance
in the direction from which they had come, then, striking a well-worn
cart-path to the right, suddenly emerged from a piece of woods near a
river, on the farther bank of which was a saw-mill, and in the stream
were men at work strengthening a dam.

"There," said the hunter, "is the centre of things, so fur as this
vicinity is concerned. That's the store,"--as he pointed across the
river to a small building,--"and a hotel is going up just opposite;
and the land sharks and speculators that's going to settle here will
want jist sich as you right among 'em, to stir up their consciences,
and jog their pure minds by way of remembrance,--as the Book
says,--an' not way off there!" pointing contemptuously over his
shoulder.

"But brother Smith informs me that all the land near to the town is
taken up," said the missionary.

"_Brother_ Smith--who's he? I know _Charles_ Smith; and if you kin
fellowship him, I can't. An' when you come to sift folks down,--as I
foresee sich as you will,--you won't brother him much, unless he
repints--an' I don't say he won't. Now let me introduce you to your
future home, ef you settles in these parts. There, _this_ is the town,
where we now are;" and he placed the tip of his little finger on the
place as represented on the map. "Now coming down square on to the
town-site is this eighty-acre lot; lays beautiful to the town, the
main street running right up to it. And through that street,"
continued he, impressively, "must go all the travel to the important
places beyond. And by and by, when the immigration gets strong enough,
the owner of that piece of land will hev corner lots and sich to sell.
Let me show jist how it lays;" and crossing the bridge, and passing up
the projected street, he stopped the horses on a gentle rise of
ground, forming the nearest point in the eighty acres. "There," he
continued, referring to the map again, "you see the eighty-acre lot
runs lengthwise from the town. Across it runs a tributary of the
river--just down there where you see the plum and bass-wood trees;
and beyond that are ten acres of the richest and easiest-worked river
bottom that the sun ever shone on--all fenced; then follers thirty
acres of young and valuable timber land. Here's your building spot
right here where we stand, in sight of everybody, and all the travel,
handy to the store, and saw-mill, and post-office, and sich, and handy
to meetin'; and the ten acres of alluvial, rich as the richest, and
finely pulverized as powder,--you ken plough it or hoe it jist as easy
as you ken turn your hand over,--will give you all the sarce you want,
and something to sell. And there's wood enough down over the place to
keep yer fires a going; and when you want to pre-empt, jist sell some
of yer standing timber there, to help pay for the whole, at government
price."

"But," replied the missionary, as the squatter finished his graphic
description, "I see by this chart that this is taken up;" for he had
meanwhile been examining it.

"Well," said the hunter, "whose name's writ down as the owner of this
land?"

"Henry Simonds," said the minister, reading from the paper.

"And do you know who 'Henry Simonds' may be?" asked the hunter. "It's
a young chap jist turned nineteen, and of course not old 'nough to
pre-empt, according to law, and who hasn't lived on this claim a day
in his life. There isn't a sign of a shanty on the place, and the law
requires that every man must show _something_ of a house to prove that
he is an actual settler. That name's a blind. This land jines Smith's,
and he's been carrying on the ten-acre lot over the river, rent free;
and it comes very handy for him to come in on this piece and get his
saw-logs. It's government property; and all you have to do is, to put
you up a cabin, and go ahead, and if Smith kicks up a fuss, jist send
him to me."

This revelation of duplicity on the part of Mr. Smith took the
minister by surprise. It was evident that the location would be as
advantageous for him as his plain-spoken guide had represented. It was
defrauding the government for Smith to hold it as he did; and should
he, in a legal way, take possession, no one could accuse him of wrong.
But he had not come out on the frontier to promote his worldly
interests; and he said to the hunter,--

"What you say is all right, I have no doubt, Mr. Jones; but it is not
land that I want so much as to do good among this people; and I should
not wish to do anything that would cause ill feeling."

"Just as I expected," said the squatter, with a disappointed air; "and
I rather think you belong to the kingdom that is not of this world.
But you are stopping at Edmunds's--aren't you? Well, it's only a short
piece to his cabin, and I must take the team back; but"--after
thinking a moment--"if you'll take the dam on your way, you'll find
Palmer there. He's a Christian, if there is one in these parts; and
you can depend on him; and if you choose to talk with him a bit about
this eighty-acre lot, there won't be any harm done."

The minister thanked the squatter for his services, the latter saying,
as he drove off,--

"Call on me agin, if you want anything in my line."

As the missionary passed towards the dam, he saw the surveyors at
work, dividing the town site into lots; and he paused to notice again
the location. The underbrush had been carefully removed, and the
cleared space--bounded on one hand by the river, and on the other by
the forest, while farther away from each side stretched the smooth
prairie--looked as if nature had intended it as a business centre.

"How do you like our town plot?" said a voice at his side.

"It is charming!" exclaimed the preacher; and, turning, he saw Mr.
Palmer.

He was a medium-sized man, in shirt sleeves and blue overalls, with an
old black silk hat on, which, from its bent appearance, gave one the
idea that it had on occasions been used for a seat as well as a
covering. The keen blue eyes under it, and the general contour of the
face, ending in a smoothly-shaven chin, revealed a hard-working,
frugal, money-saving character, yet honest, sincere, and unselfish. He
was, indeed,--what he struck the observer as being,--a prudent
counsellor, a true friend, a wisely-generous helper in every good word
and work. No man in the settlement was more respected than he--a
respect not based on his personal appearance, it was clear; for he had
a perfect contempt for the ostentations of dress and equipage, but due
to his straightforward and consistent deportment. He was about forty,
and unmarried, and, on account of his amiable, thrifty, and
Christianly qualities, was said to be the victim of incessant
"cap-setting" by managing mammas and marriageable daughters, and of no
little raillery on the part of the men, which he bore with great good
nature, safely escaping from each matrimonial snare, and returning
joke for joke.

"Been looking up land?" asked the bachelor.

The missionary related the day's doings, and what the squatter had
said about Mr. Smith and the eighty acres.

"Jones has stated the facts in the case," said Mr. Palmer, "and
advised well; but it won't do for you to have any falling out with
Smith. If you will leave the matter with me, I guess I can manage it
so that you shall have the eighty acres, and there be no bad feelings.
We had better pay Smith something than to have a quarrel."

"But is Smith a member of a church?" asked the missionary.

"We don't know who is who, yet," answered the other; "but should we
ever form a church here, of course he'll have to show a certificate of
membership in order to join; and I rather think he'll never be able to
do that. Do him all the good you can, but don't trust him overmuch."




CHAPTER VI.

MRS. JONES'S STORY.--THE GRAY WOLF.


"Was it so _very_ different east, mother," asked Tom, one day, "where
you came from, from what it is here?"

"Different in what respects?" she inquired.

"O," he answered, hesitatingly, "I mean, were folks as poor and
ignorant as--as--"

"As we are, you were going to say," said she, placidly, finishing his
sentence for him.

"I don't think that you and father are _ignorant_," he replied,
looking confused; "but--"

"I understand what you mean, Tom. No; where your father and I were
born, and where we were married, the country was thickly settled. All
the children went to school, and there were no such cabins as the one
we live in, but nice, framed houses of wood, stone, or brick."

"Were there no poor people there?"

"Yes, as many as there are here,--a great many in the large
cities,--and they found it very hard getting along."

"Were yours and father's folks very poor?"

"No; they were in comfortable circumstances."

"Then why, mother, did you come west, and why do we live as we do
now?"

As she did not at once reply, the lad, busy once more with his own
thoughts, forgot that he had asked the question. He had often revolved
the matter in his own mind, but had never before ventured to speak of
it. His mother's conversation with him, after his injury by the gun,
had shown him the folly of his plan of leaving home clandestinely; but
dissatisfaction with his lot grew with his growth and strengthened
with his strength. It was a great mystery to him how his mother could
consent to live so, for so many years. He would look at the black and
crazy loggery, with its clay "chinking," that was ever more cracking,
and crumbling, and falling to the floor, leaving holes between the
logs, through which the wind and rain entered; and the one rickety
chair, and the rude benches and boxes for sitting accommodations, and
the bedsteads, composed of rough oaken slabs, spiked at the head and
side to the walls, and a rough post at the unsupported corner, and the
cracked and rusted stove and leaky funnel; and then he would look at
his mother, who, despite her coarse and dingy dress, seemed so
superior to her condition; and the more he realized the contrast, the
more he marvelled. When he was younger, he had noticed this
incongruity between his gentle mother and her wretched surroundings;
and now he sometimes wished he could be insensible to it, it made him
so unhappy. How restless he became--how like a caged eaglet, as he
pondered the subject by night and by day--none knew save the watchful
friend who moved so gently about the dark-lighted cabin, and kept so
uncomplainingly at her tasks.

And his father seemed to him, in his way, as much of a mystery as his
mother. Was he contented with the roving life he led? and did he never
realize the deprivations of his wife and children? Did father and
mother ever know brighter days? and were they never to see them again?
And was it duty for him to keep on in the same way, sacrificing every
rising aspiration and pure taste, and getting nothing in return but
poor food and clothing, a comfortless home, and a mind undeveloped and
unfurnished?

Seated on the end of a box, shelling corn by drawing the ears against
the back of a broken scythe, he had been working and thinking through
the evening, while the children slept, with no one to notice his
absent-minded labor but his ever-wakeful mother.

"I will not endure it," he mentally exclaimed; and, by way of
emphasis, he drew the ear of corn he held against the edge of the
scythe with unusual force, at the same instant springing to his feet
with a cry of pain, and a finger in his mouth, upsetting his seat, and
sending the contents of the box rolling across the floor, and into the
gaping cracks.

"O, I've scraped my finger awfully!" he said, with grimaces that added
nothing to his personal attractions.

"Why, how did you do it, my son?" asked the mother, although she knew
very well.

"Why, you see, I was thinking about something, and pulled my finger,
instead of the cob, against the edge."

Mrs. Jones laid back the strip of bleeding flesh into the place from
which it had thus unceremoniously been torn, and from which it hung by
a bit of skin, and carefully bound up the wound.

Then, sweeping the scattered kernels into a heap, and restoring them
to the box, she seated herself in a little dislocated chair, and
said,--

"There, don't shell any more now, Tom; I have something to say to you.
You asked why we came west. The time has come when you had better know
something of our history; it may help you decide your course of
action.

"Your father and I were born in Connecticut, in the same town. We
attended school together in our early childhood, and often played
together. Both of our families were respectable--your father's quite
so, although not so well off as to property as mine. He was a bright,
promising boy, quick to learn, warm-hearted, and conscientious. I
never knew him guilty of any of the petty meannesses too common among
school children. He was sensitive to a fault, but had high notions of
honor, and despised falsehood and deception in any form. When I was
seventeen I became secretly engaged to him. My parents did not suspect
this, nor did any of the household, except a younger sister, to whom I
confided my secret. I now think it would have been better for all
concerned had I from the first been open in the matter, and frankly
stated to my mother what my preference was. But I knew that he was not
their choice for me. They were ambitious to have me marry brilliantly,
as the phrase went,--that is, wealthily and in style,--and he was
young, and had his fortune to carve out pretty much for himself. He
knew what their hopes were concerning me, matrimonially, and, that I
might be perfectly free to break the engagement, should I repent of
it, rarely saw me, nor did any correspondence pass between us. My
regard for him did not lessen on this account, for I understood his
motives. When he was of age, his father died, leaving him a thousand
dollars as his portion. With this he went into business, with good
prospects, in a neighboring city. I shall never forget how earnestly
he spoke, one evening, as we parted after a brief interview.

"'Mary,' said he, 'I will be rich. I've set my mind on that; and then
your father won't be ashamed to own me as a son-in-law, and I shall
come and claim you.'

"It seemed noble and heroic for him to speak thus; but my heart smote
me with foreboding, and I answered,--

"'But what if you do not succeed?'

"'I _will_ succeed;' he replied, impetuously. 'What a man _wills_ he
can do.'

"Ah, how foolish and sinful it is to worship money and show, as my
parents did; how much suffering it has caused me! and how equally
unwise and presumptuous it was for a young man, stung by the pride of
others, to make that the rule of his life, and go forth in his own
strength to build up a fortune, so that he might _demand_ me of my
parents as an equal, and thus gratify his own pride! I see it now, but
not clearly then.

"Joseph, for a time, was prosperous. Everything he turned his hand to
was remunerative; and when we met, his manner was confident and
hopeful.

"'Let the old gentleman look down upon me now if he chooses,' he would
say; 'he won't always do it.'

"He had been a year in business when a partnership was proposed to him
by a man of education and gentlemanly appearance. Joseph spoke to me
about it, and I said,--

"'You are doing well enough now. Why not be contented to go alone? I
have often heard that partnerships are poor ships to sail in.'

"'Well,' said he, 'there's something in his appearance that I do not
quite like, and I think I shall not take him in.'

"But as the man came with the highest testimonials as to his
character, ability, and influence, with the hope of greatly enlarging
his business, a copartnership was entered into. Mr. Jacques, the
partner, was Joseph's senior in age--a stout, robust man, with a high
forehead, light hair, always carried a cane, was jovial, and
good-natured in the extreme, fond of telling a good story, but sharp
in trade. I met him on one occasion, and there was something in the
turn of his eye--a restless, jerking, selfish expression--that made me
shrink from him. Joseph was proud of his acquisition, and, remembering
my caution, asked me what I thought of him. I well remember the reply
that leaped to my lips.

"'Didn't you say that he was religious?'

"'He professes to be,' said he.

"'I fear that it is only a cloak to his real character. If he is a
Christian, I do not know what grace has done for him; but if I do not
misread his face, he is constitutionally dishonest.'

"But every thing went on smoothly, and Joseph would say to me when we
met,--

"'My partner loves scandal a little too well--is apt to talk against
others; but one thing I'm sure of--he's honest.'

"One morning, some months after this conversation, I chanced to meet
Joseph as he was going to the office; he looked pale and careworn.

"'O,' said he, 'I have had the most singular exercise of mind. Some
folks are troubled with sleeplessness; but I never was until last
night. I went to bed feeling as well as usual, but could not sleep. I
was not unusually tired, had taken a light supper, and saw no reason
why I should be so wakeful. I turned and tossed in bed, and shut my
eyes; but all in vain. I even laid my finger on my wrist, that the
counting of my pulse might, by the monotony, induce slumber; when,
suddenly, before my mind's eye stood my partner; it seemed as real as
life; and with the appearance came little remarks of his, little acts
and words, which, as they ranged themselves along like the links in a
chain, revealed him to me, against my will, as a deceiver and a
dishonest man.'

"He was much excited, and hurried to town. Mr. Jacques, as I
afterwards learned, was there before him, and met him with his bland
smile and well-turned compliments; and, strange as it may seem,
scarcely an hour had passed before he had charmed away every shadow of
suspicion. Matters now went on as before for a few weeks, when Joseph
had another sleepless night, and a more convincing unfolding of his
partner's real character; and the next night, after the office had
been closed, he spent in examining the books of the concern, and
detected a number of artfully-contrived fraudulent entries in the
handwriting of his partner, for, according to agreement, the latter
kept the accounts. Further revelations showed that he had been
gradually abstracting the stock. As soon as Mr. Jacques saw that he
was being found out, his gentleness and politeness were all gone, and
he raged like a beast of prey. Joseph attached his furniture at his
dwelling, but found it had all been made over to his son--a young
lawyer in the city; meanwhile the dishonest man had fled with his
ill-gotten gains, leaving the business in a frightfully complicated
state. The result was, as is often the case when a man begins to go
down in his affairs, although he may be ever so deserving and
innocent, there are enough to give him a push. It was so with him. In
vain did Joseph, by his books, show that he was doing well up to the
cruel embezzlements, and that if he was dealt leniently with, he could
recover his standing, and go on as prosperously as before; his
creditors, one after another, ferociously pounced upon him; he got
through one trouble only to meet another, until utter failure came.
The effect on Joseph was lamentable in the extreme. He sat by his fire
at home, day after day, for weeks, with his head buried in his hands,
in utter despair. Had some kind friend stepped forward and started him
anew, what a deed of mercy it would have been! But the men whom he
accommodated with money, when prosperous, turned their backs upon him
now.

"Recovering somewhat from the shock, he sought again and again for
employment; but his short-sighted and relentless creditors would
factorize his earnings, and thus oblige him to leave."

"Factorize!" asked Tom, interrupting her; "what is that?"

"Why," said the mother, "if a man owes another, the creditor attaches
his wages, and when the man presents his bill to his employer, he
finds that he cannot pay him anything. In vain he went to distant
places to earn a subsistence. Shrewd lawyers were put upon his track;
he was ferretted out, until, discouraged, he came to me one day, and
said,--

"'Mary, the hounds are after me from morning till night. They dog my
steps wherever I go, and give me no chance to retrieve my fortunes. I
am going to the west; and it isn't right to hold you to your
engagement any longer, for I can never, on my part, fulfil it. The
odds are against me here, and, what is worse, I've lost my courage and
hope; I have come to bid you good by.'

"'If you do not care for me any longer,' I said, 'say so. You've
struggled hard, and have merited a better result; it isn't your fault
that you have failed. God forbid that I should break my promise. If
you must go west, you are not going alone. I shall go with you, and
shall this very night tell my parents all about my engagement, and get
their consent to our marriage.'

"He shook his head. But feeling that it had been cowardly in me not to
have mentioned the subject before, whatever the result might have
been, in a few words I frankly, and with a composure that surprised
myself, told them the whole story. My father was a quick-tempered,
imperious man, and my mother lived only for this world: the result
you can easily imagine. But I felt that my duty was plain; and we were
quietly married. Having a little money of my own, joining it with what
your father had by him, we started towards the setting sun. But what
was that?" said Mrs. Jones, stopping in her recital, as a strange
sound fell upon her ear.

It was a long, fiendish yell, swelling upon the still night air over
the unbroken solitudes of the prairie; it was most appalling. Tom and
his mother hastened to the window; they saw a noble buck, his antlers
held aloft, flying with his utmost speed, pursued by two dark-looking
objects, that gained rapidly on him.

"It's the gray wolf," said Tom, "chasing a deer. How I wish I had a
rifle! I could bring one of them down easy as not,"--as they dashed
by, with short, quick yells, following their prey into the woods that
skirted the river.

"I hope the poor creature will escape," said Mrs. Jones, with a sigh;
and she resumed her narrative. "I was not long in seeing, on our
journey out, that a dreadful change had been wrought in your father by
his business troubles. It had given him an unconquerable disgust of
society, which he has not yet outgrown, making him uneasy and restless
wherever he has been; and this, Tom, is the secret of his wandering
life; and this is why I never feel that I can complain at any of the
changes in our hard, unsettled career as a family."

Tom, who had listened absorbed to this before unread chapter in the
family history, was deeply moved, and, while the tears filled his
eyes, asked, in tremulous tones,--

"Do you think father'll ever get over it, mother?"

"Tom," replied she, "your father has a true heart and a good mind, and
I believe that, in some way, good will yet come out of this
long-continued trial. He's taken a great liking to the missionary; and
Mr. Payson seems to understand him better than most, and I am praying
that the acquaintance may lead to something brighter for him; and,
Tom," she added, "I have told you this that you may see a new reason
for not being in haste to leave your father and mother. There is one
passage in the Bible I often think of, which directs us to both hope
and quietly wait for the salvation of God. Your father's mistake, when
he went into business, was, that he was in too great haste to
accomplish his own will. This is apt to be the error of the young.
They are sanguine of success, and they rush into the battle of life
without waiting to put on the armor of faith. What the young want in
setting out, Tom, is a Guide and a Helper, who cannot err, and will
not forsake them. An old man in our town used to say, 'Never try to
kick open the door of Providence.' I want you, Tom, to wait patiently
till Providence opens the door for you. Then you need not be afraid to
go forward."




CHAPTER VII.

A SABBATH ON THE PRAIRIE.


_Extracts from the Missionary's Diary._

Yesterday I preached my first sermon in a log cabin. When I awoke in
the early morning, and looked out of the little window at the head of
my bed in the rough, low-roofed attic, a new world seemed to break on
my sight. Instead of the narrow, noisy streets and tenanted blocks of
the populous eastern city, my eyes rested on one vast green field
stretching to the arching horizon, over which brooded a profound
silence, intensified by the sacred hush of the Sabbath.

My host offered his own cabin for the forenoon service. His son--a
sturdy young man of eighteen, inured to pioneer life--had ridden far
and wide to give notice of the meeting, and he was confident of a good
attendance. I anticipated the labors of the day with some misgivings,
for I had become slavishly accustomed to the use of written sermons;
but here, before a log-cabin audience, to speak from manuscript was
not to be thought of. For once, at least, I must trust to the grace of
Christ, and speak as the Spirit gave utterance. My study was a corner
of the loft, my library a pocket Bible.

"Where do all these people come from?" I ejaculated in pleased
surprise, as, for a full hour before the time appointed, men, women,
and children, afoot, in wagons and ox-teams, continued to arrive. And
through the cracks in the loosely-laid, unnailed floor, I could see
members of the family engaged in contriving sitting accommodations for
the growing congregation. Unplaned oaken boards, placed across trunks,
boxes, and huge blocks, soon filled the room, every seat being
occupied, while groups of men stood about the door outside, or sat
upon the embankment. I would have a "full house" certainly. And what
effort had been made by these frontier folk to attend I could easily
imagine. Some had walked many miles for the purpose; most had come
quite a distance. And the earnest, thoughtful faces that met my gaze,
as I descended the ladder, and read the opening hymn,--how reverently
their heads were bowed for prayer, and with what hushed interest they
listened to the discourse,--I can not soon forget. One woman, who sat
surrounded by her family, wept from the announcement of the text till
the close of the sermon--wept for joy that, once more, after long
deprivation of sanctuary privileges, she could hear the word of God.
It was a scene for a painter--that log cabin crowded with
representatives of every state in the Union, in every variety of garb,
and of all ages, from the gray-haired backwoodsman to the babe in its
mother's arms. No costly organ was here, with its gentle, quiet
breathings, or grand and massive harmonies; no trained choir; no
consecrated temple, with its Sabbath bell, and spire pointing
heavenward; no carpeted aisles and "dim religious light," and
sculptured, cushioned pulpit. But I could not doubt the presence of
the Spirit. And when, at the close, "Praise God, from whom all
blessings flow," was sung to Old Hundred,--sung as if with one voice
and soul, the clear, sweet tones of childhood blending with the deeper
sounds of manhood and womanhood,--the rough, rude building seemed as
the gate of heaven.

My appointment for the afternoon was at a small settlement eleven
miles away.

A charming drive through the "oak openings" and over the rolling
prairie brought us to the cabin which was to serve as meeting-house.
It was a long, low, one-roomed building, the logs of which it was
constructed still rejoicing in their primitive covering of bark, the
openings between them being closed with clay thrown in by hand. Mr.
G., the owner,--a short, gray-haired, brisk little man with a wooden
leg, gave me a cordial welcome, and, to show how willing he was to
have the meeting in his cabin, pointed to his shoemaker's bench, and
various articles of furniture, including a bedstead, trundle-bed, and
bedding, which had been removed from the room, and piled in admirable
disorder outside.

"You have been to a great deal of trouble," I remarked.

"None too much," he cheerily replied. "I am an old soldier, you see,
and that's why I have to hobble about on this," pointing to the
ancient artificial limb. "I was in the war of 1812, belonged to the
cavalry, and at the battle of--"

"Husband," gently interposed his wife,--an intellectual-looking woman,
with a face expressive of goodness,--"the minister will not care to
hear of war to-day;" adding, with a blush, "You must excuse us, sir;
but it is so long since we have seen one of your profession, or
attended religious services, that the days seem too much alike; there
is little here to remind us that the Sabbath should be kept holy. O,
it is so dreadful--so like heathenism--to live without the ordinances
of the gospel! No Sunday school for our children and youth, no servant
of God to counsel the dying, comfort the bereaved, and point the
heavy-laden to Christ!"

"Such a state of things must, indeed, be a great trial to those who
love the Saviour," I observed.

"Yes; and what adds to the trial," she continued, "is, that members of
churches, after they have been here awhile, fall into great laxity in
respect to the Lord's day. Those who were exemplary east, are here
seen starting upon or returning from a business journey on Sunday. O,
we need some one to gather these straying sheep, and unite them by the
public means of grace: many of them, I doubt not, are secretly longing
for this. For more than a year I have been praying that God would send
a servant of his this way."

"And sometimes, I dare say, you have felt almost discouraged," I
suggested.

"Yes," she replied, weeping; "but last week something came to
strengthen my faith, and later, intelligence that you were to visit
us. Months ago I wrote east for a donation of good reading to scatter
among the settlers, but received no response till, last Tuesday, a
package of books, tracts, and religious papers arrived. In one of the
papers was an article entitled 'The Pulpit and the Beech Tree.'"

"Here it is," said the husband, passing her the sheet; "better read it
to the parson; there'll be plenty of time afore the meeting;" and he
glanced at a venerable clock screwed to a log over the wide-mouthed
clay-stick-and-stone fireplace.

She read as follows: "Nearly a score of years ago, a pioneer sought a
home in one of the Western States. He selected a 'quarter section' in
a dense wilderness, and soon entered upon the arduous work of clearing
a farm. He was a man of athletic constitution, and well adapted to
cope with the trials on the frontier. He was in the prime of life; and
in those days a man was famous according as he had 'lifted axes upon
the thick trees.' This man was ranked among the leading characters in
that region. He could bear up with fortitude under all trials and
privations, except those of a religious kind.

"Before his removal to the west, he had enjoyed the privileges of a
large and well-regulated church, in which he had for years been a
prominent member. To be thus suddenly deprived of those blessed means
of grace caused him many painful feelings, and at times almost
incapacitated him for ordinary duties. This subject pressed so heavily
on his mind, that he often sought relief in laying his wants before
God in prayer. One day he enjoyed near access to the throne while on
his knees in a secluded part of the forest. He prayed earnestly that
God would make that wilderness and solitary place glad with the sound
of the gospel. He asked for the church privileges to which he had
been accustomed, and he felt assured that God could grant them. So
much was he engaged in pleading for this blessing, that he forgot his
work. His family looked for his return to dinner, but he came not.
They were alarmed, and, making search, found him on his knees. To this
man of God there was something peculiarly pleasant in the memory of
that approach to the mercy-seat. He loved the spot on which he had
knelt, and determined to mark it. It was by the side of a beech tree.
He 'blazed' it, so that in after years it might remind him of the
incident that I have related.

"That prayer was speedily answered. God put it into the hearts of the
people of that region to build a sanctuary in the desert. They have
now the stated means of grace. That pioneer is one of the officers of
the church. The membership is near eighty. The cause of religion seems
to be flourishing among them. Not long since it was my privilege to
preach in their house of worship; it was filled with an intelligent
congregation. At the close of the services, the old man gave me a
history of his praying under the beech tree, and, with tears in his
eyes, closed by saying, 'That tree stood only about five feet from the
very spot where you stood while preaching for us to-night.'"

"There," said she, at the conclusion of the narrative, "I felt that
this was a word in season to me. I fell upon my knees, and, with
increased earnestness, pleaded for the privileges of the gospel, and
rose feeling, as did the pioneer, that God would grant the request.
But how did my heart leap with glad surprise the next day,--that is,
last Wednesday,--when a neighbor called to consult me about a place
for you to preach in!"

But it was time for service. There was the same thronged attendance
and absorbed attention as in the morning. How delightful to proclaim
the tidings of great joy to those who are hungering for the word of
life! How different from ministering to fashionable worldly hearers,
who gather in the house of God for intellectual entertainment, or from
motives of custom, respectability, or ostentation, and who are
hardened by the very abundance of spiritual instruction!

At the close of the services, with the social freedom of western
intercourse, I was introduced to most present, and they all seemed
anxious that I should make a home in their neighborhood. How different
it would be to settle with this new people, on the precarious
subsistence which I might get for my family here, preaching, and
perhaps keeping house, in a log cabin, from the situation I must fill,
should I accept the call extended by the large and wealthy church in
N. A frontier parish on a prairie, on the outskirts of civilization,
and a city parish,--what a contrast! But my heart is strongly drawn
towards this people. Should I remain with them, what would my
money-loving, place-seeking, eastern friends say?

                  *       *       *       *       *

I have passed another delightful Sabbath, notwithstanding certain
trifling violations of the proprieties of worship as observed in
eastern assemblies.

It struck me quite ludicrously, at first, to see mother's listening to
the preaching while nursing or dandling their infants. Yesterday a
fat, burly baby, who, by some singular good fortune, had an
apple,--for we never see that fruit here,--let it drop from his fat
fist, and it rolled nearly to my feet; and the mother, not in the
least disconcerted, gravely came and picked it up, and returned it to
her boy. Nobody, however, was disturbed by the incident; all appeared
to take it as a matter of course. And I confess I like this absence of
fastidious conventionalities. Why should the mother be kept from the
house of God because she may not bring her child with her? "Suffer the
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not," said the great
Preacher when the disciples would drive out of _his_ congregation the
mothers and their infants. Is the servant more particular than his
Lord?

Then, too, the uncouth garments of many of my log-cabin hearers,--how
unlike the elegant and costly apparel worn in our eastern sanctuaries!
But I like the western way best as to dress. I enjoy seeing the poor,
in his plain attire, sitting unabashed by the side of the man in
"goodly apparel." And when I consider what thousands of starving souls
are kept out of Christian churches because they cannot dress in
broadcloth and silk, and how much money is wasted and vanity indulged
by the bedizened crowds that throng our sanctuaries, I am thankful
that the reign of fashion is unknown on the frontier.

But these hardy pioneers are bold and independent thinkers. The
preacher must show himself "a workman that needeth not to be ashamed,
_rightly_ dividing the word of truth," if he would keep his hold on
their respect. It will not do to be careless even in teaching the
Sabbath school. I was suddenly reminded of this yesterday. Speaking on
the subject of benevolence, I had remarked that the poorest of us, if
we were careful not to waste, might have something that we could spare
as well as not to those needier than ourselves. And I inquired if any
scholar could tell me what scripture enforced this lesson. As no one
responded, I read the account of the multiplying of the loaves and
fishes when Christ fed the fainting multitudes; and coming to the
words, "Gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost," I asked, "Do
not these words show that we ought to save the pieces, that we may
give them to the hungry?"

"No, sir," promptly answered a lad of about sixteen.

Thinking he had misunderstood the question, I repeated it, saying, "I
asked, Thomas,"--for that was the boy's name,--"if this language does
not teach that we should save what we are apt to throw away, that we
may have something to give the poor."

"I do not think it does," he replied.

"Why not?" I inquired.

"Jesus told the disciples to share the nice new loaves with the
people, and to keep the bits and ends for themselves."

He was right. I had unconsciously been making that great miracle of
mercy teach stinginess! How often I had heard it explained to polished
audiences in New England in the same way, and not a criticism offered.
Yet the one who pointed out this strangely-common error was a child
belonging to one of the most thriftless of these frontier families.
His name is Jones; and he is, I think, a lad of promise, in whom I am
becoming much interested, as also in his father, a restless, singular
being, but who is more of a man, in my judgment, than he seems.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I am getting to feel more and more deeply that duty calls me to labor
here. If it were not for my dear wife and children, I should decide at
once to remain. But how could she get along in this out-of-the-world
place? Can she relinquish the comforts of her eastern home, and share
with me, for the Master's sake, the privations of the wilderness? The
settlers are kind, and say we shall not suffer. A subscription paper
has been started, and has already a goodly array of names; and brother
Palmer--an excellent man of some means--says he will furnish me money
with which to build a neat cottage.




CHAPTER VIII.

TOM'S VICTORY.


Tom retired to bed the night after his mother had confided to him the
history of his father's business trials, feeling that she had
conferred an honor upon him in thus sharing with him her life-secret,
and that he understood his parents as he never did before. He was
conscious, also, that she had put him under new obligation to be
always frank with her, as she had been with him; that she had, in
fact, made the obligation very sacred, for he realized that it was an
act of condescension in her thus to make him the repository of her
secrets, while to share his with her was but the duty of a child, and
for his own advantage. And he thought, "How can I now desert the
family for any imaginary good, and leave her to reproach me by her
patient cross-bearing for dear father and the children's sake?"

It cost him a bitter struggle to act in accordance with this view. In
the darkness of the night he wrestled long and hard to put down the
wish to free himself from the burden that was now laid upon his
conscience. He, the squatter's son, in his wretched life, had built up
a golden future for himself, as the ambitious young, of every
condition, are sure to do when once the heart is roused to wish, and
the mind to plan, for great things. And now, to give it all up, and
come down to the cheerless drudgery of home-service in _such_ a
home,--it could not be expected that he could do this, only after a
severe conflict with his own nature, if at all. It is true his mother
had exhorted him to wait for Providence to open the door before him.
But he could not help recalling, with an aching heart, through how
many long, weary years she had waited; and what door of relief had
been opened for her? And was she not a thousand fold more deserving of
such an interposition than he? He reflected on this point till his
brain was in a whirl; the more he pondered the matter, the darker it
seemed.

"I am called," he reasoned, "to keep by the family if I never see
brighter days--that's the meaning of her words, and the demands of my
lot. Am I ready to do this--to be true to duty, if it involves, as it
has to her, poverty, seclusion from privileges, toil, suffering,
obscurity?"

He knew that he ought thus to decide, and to decide cheerfully. But he
could not. He tried again and again to reach the decision only to
recoil from it. His will was powerless to calm the rebellion within.
Ah, the pioneer's ragged son had been precipitated into a solemn moral
crisis, which tested him, and showed him how weak he was! The tumult
of feeling, and sharpness of the battle, had, at length, cast him into
utter despair, when his mother's remark concerning his father's
mistake in setting about getting rich by the strength of his own will,
abruptly recurred to him.

"What did she mean by that?" he asked; and he sat bolt upright in bed
to consider the point.

He could not, however, quite master the idea, and wished his mother
was awake, that she might explain herself. Then his mind returned to
the subject, and lo, the mist rolled away, and the truth shone out.

"I see it: father should have sought direction and strength of God.
And that is just what I ought to do. He can give me grace to perform
my duty,--yes, even to choose it."

And Tom, under the inspiration of the light that was breaking in upon
his soul, resolved,--

"I'll ask God to enable me to do as mother has advised, and as I see
to be right in the circumstances."

And covering his face with his hands, he lifted up his heart in
prayer. As he prayed, a heavenly peace seemed to pervade his whole
being. It stole upon him so gently and unexpectedly, that he felt
like shouting praises to God; and at last, unable to keep his
marvellous happiness to himself, he called, softly,--

"Mother, mother!"

"What do you wish, my son?" she asked, always ready to answer her
children's calls.

"O, mother," he replied, "I have been struggling and praying, and I've
got the victory."

Instantly she was kneeling on the rough floor by his side,--she
understood him,--and tears of grateful joy ran down her face, and she
said,--

"It is as I would have it, Tom. God has taken you up, and all will be
well."

Next morning Tom arose with a peaceful, serious face. His mother did
not allude to the happy change that had transpired within him during
the night, but as she busied herself about breakfast, she would
occasionally wipe away the tears, for her heart was full.

"Mother," said he, as they finished their frugal meal, "I've been
thinking it would be a good plan to get up all the wood we can while
the weather is pleasant. Winter'll be coming along by and by, and
it'll be so nice to have a warm fire all the time then, and not have
to wade through the snow after something to burn."

"Yes," she replied, "we have not had our Indian summer yet; and while
that lasts we shall use but little fuel, and if you and the children
are smart, you can get quite a pile ahead."

"Why is the beautiful spell we have in fall called Indian summer?" he
asked.

"Because," replied his mother, "the Indians were in the habit of
attacking the white settlements then; they don't go on their war
expeditions after cold weather sets in. And," she added, sighing, "I
shall be glad when snow comes, for I shall feel that we are safe until
spring opens."

"The Allens are dreadful mad about their cattle," remarked Tom. "The
old man tracked them to a ravine in the woods, and found that his oxen
had been killed and dressed: the horns and hide lay on the ground, and
the blood was scarcely cold, but not an Indian was to be seen. He
couldn't even find a trail, and he's an old Indian-fighter, you
know."

"Have any Indians been seen near here, since?"

"Yes; Mr. Payson, the missionary, saw one the other morning as he was
going from Root River settlement to Slough Creek. He was passing the
Norwegian's cabin, near the grove, when suddenly a Sioux galloped by
on his pony, giving a loud whoop as he rode out of sight. And Mrs.
Pingry had a great scare. Her husband was away after supplies, and she
was alone about her work, when the door opened and an Indian stalked
in and took a seat. Pretty soon a second came, and did the same, and
then another; until a dozen sat round the room, silently smoking their
pipes. She says she knew by their manner and the way they were painted
that they intended mischief. She determined, however, not to appear
frightened, and went on with her work. Soon one of them got up and
broke open her husband's trunk, and then the rest fell to rummaging
the house, helping themselves to whatever they wished; and she was
expecting they would next assault her, when, to her relief, she heard
the barking of a dog, and the rumbling of wheels, at which the savages
took alarm, and in a moment were gone."

"And what," asked Mrs. Jones, "do the settlers think of this?"

"O, they only laugh about it. They don't expect any serious trouble.
They say that the chiefs have had a grand talk with the government
agent, and declare that they wish to be on good terms with us. But
some of our people do all they can to provoke the Indians, and say
they would like to have a brush with the red-skins!"

"But what's that?" he exclaimed, as loud shouts and the barking of
dogs broke on their ears. Mrs. Jones and Tom hurried to the door, and
saw some men and boys chasing a large animal across the prairie.

"A bear! a bear!" cried a neighbor, rushing breathlessly up to Tom,
saying, "Is your father at home? Tell him to come on, and we'll pepper
his carcass!" and without waiting for an answer, or explaining whose
carcass he meant, he hastened after the others.

The creature that they were pursuing was so fat that he did not run
very swiftly, and the dogs gained on him; aware of which, he was
making desperate efforts to gain the shelter of a small grove not far
off, while stringing along for quite a distance behind were his
pursuers. Some were hatless, a few had guns, but most were armed with
pitchforks or clubs; and one man, in his zeal, carried a piece of
rusty stove-pipe, although what use he proposed to put it to in
capturing Bruin, it was difficult to imagine, unless he intended,
should Bear gain the grove, to _smoke him out_ with it. The truth is,
he was putting up a stove in his cabin when the cry of "Bear, bear,"
interrupted his labors, and he joined the chase, forgetting that he
held anything in his hand. He was wiry, lank, and long-legged, with
sandy hair that came down straight and thin upon his shoulders, and
being without his coat, with pants that reached only half way between
his knees and ankles, he cut a ludicrous figure as he straddled on,
followed by a short, dumpy man, who, waddle as ambitiously as he
might, swiftly fell behind, without, however, seeming in the least
discouraged.

"There, they are surrounding the grove," said Tom, as the men and boys
spread out from the centre till they had encompassed Bruin's leafy
retreat.

Soon there was the report of guns, and not long after, the hunters
returned, looking tired and disappointed.

"The bear must have got away," said Mrs. Jones.

But Charley came rushing towards her, and, throwing up his cap,
cried,--

"O, isn't it fun! It wasn't a bear, mother; it was only Mr. Abbott's
black hog that he lost last fall, and thought was dead. He had run
wild, feeding on roots and acorns, and was awful fat. But they didn't
know 'twas a hog till they shot him, the dogs kept up such a yelping,
and the grass and bushes hid him so. They've gone after a wagon to
take him home."

But Tom was at work making an opening in the fence nearest the woods;
seeing which, Charley called out,--

"What you doing that for, Tom?"

"I've been thinking," answered Tom, pleasantly, "that we shall want
some wood near the cabin next winter, instead of digging it out of the
snow, and I'm fixing a place to drag it through."

"Yes, children," added the mother, "Tom and I have been talking it
over. Suppose you take hold together and see how big a pile you can
get up. It will be so nice to have plenty of wood to cook the
corn-cakes with, and keep us comfortable when it's freezing weather!"

The project pleased the youngsters, even to Bub, and, headed by Tom,
they began at once to put it into execution.

It is customary in new countries for the first comers to help
themselves freely to the trees on government land, for logs with which
to construct their cabins, and to rive into shingles and saw into
boards; and many a sinewy oak had fallen before the frontiersman's axe
in the woods near the Joneses, leaving the brawny limbs upon the
ground. There were also many dead trees still standing, and from these
sources dry, hard wood of the best quality could always be obtained.

Tom directed operations. The limbs and small dead trees were thrown or
dragged in piles a certain distance towards the field; from there
another took them to the opening in the fence, and from thence others
of the youngsters pulled them up to the house. The girls and boys had
a merry time of it, Sarah making the woods ring with her bird-like
voice as she sang at her task, while many a joke was exchanged by the
lively little company. But no one of them entered on the labor with
more zeal, and a higher appreciation of his own services, than Bub.

"That child is always under foot," said Eliza, as she stumbled over
him while tugging along a scrawny limb.

"You ought to go into the house," said Tom; "I'm afraid you'll get
hurt."

"No, I won't," answered the child, "tause I dot to tarry in the wood;"
and seizing a long branch under one dimpled arm, and a short, heavy
one under the other, to make good his words, with the will of an older
head, he started for the cabin.

Out from under his arm would be wrenched the long one by some bush
beside the path, and Bub would pick it up and pull at it until it had
cleared itself, when down would go the big piece from the other arm.
Then he would bravely lift it again, his baby frock going up with it;
and thus dropping his load and picking it up, with an occasional
tumble, which he would not cry about, he reached the house, dragging
his load in through the door, to the imminent danger of knocking over
the old stove. He now rested from his labors to eat a cold potato and
a piece of his mother's much-loved corn-cake, which, while disposing
of, he dropped asleep, his rosy cheeks crammed to their utmost
capacity.

"Pooh!" cried Charley, coming noisily in to see if dinner was most
ready, "why didn't you keep to work, like the rest of us?"

Bub resumed eating, and replied, dignifiedly,--

"Tause I found out that it wasn't fun."

The unexpected effect of his answer on Charley, who received it with
uproarious laughter, highly offended the child; and when Charley was
out of sight, he said to his mother,--

"I isn't never going to work no more."

"Ah, why not?" she inquired.

"Tause I don't like to work."

"Then," said she, "you'll never make a man."

"Do men have to work?" he asked.

"Certainly," she replied.

"Then I won't be a man," he answered, decidedly.

"Won't!" exclaimed his mother; "what, then, will you be?"

"I sail be a missernary, and walk wound, and wear dold dlasses!"




CHAPTER IX.

A SURPRISE.


"Can you tell me, sir, if I can find a conveyance for myself and
children to L----, Minnesota?" inquired a lady of the attentive clerk
at a hotel in the thriving young town of Dacotah, Iowa.

"There is no stage running to that point," he replied; "but we can
send a team with you, if you wish to go to so much expense."

"I would like," answered the lady, smiling, "to get there with as
little cost as I can. My husband is a missionary. I am on my way to
join him."

"I will see what I can do for you," returned the clerk, bowing
respectfully; and, stepping into the bar-room, he asked,--

"Is there any one here going to L---- to-day?"

"I shall go half way there," said a short, sharp-nosed, black-eyed
man, who sat reading an eastern paper.

"Could you take a passenger or two?"

"I'm pretty well loaded," he answered; "but I always find room for one
more, seeing it pays."

"It's a clergyman's wife and children," said the clerk, in a lower
tone.

"O, well," replied the other, rising to his feet, "they shall go
along, pay or no pay;" and he followed the clerk, who introduced the
parties to each other with,--

"Mr. Sawyer--Mrs. Payson. He will take you as far as he goes."

"And how far is that?" she inquired.

"About twenty miles."

"But how shall I get over the remainder of the distance?"

"Don't be concerned about that," replied the man, heartily. "I guess
there'll be a way to forward you all right."

And in a half hour his team was before the door, waiting to take her
farther into the wilderness. A pair of stout iron-grays harnessed into
a long, open wagon, affording space for a large variety of boxes and
packages, and three rows of cushionless seats, constituted the
conveyance. Its owner had been on a trading expedition, but, with an
eye to "the main chance," was prepared to catch some of the travel
going westward. The wagon was crowded with passengers; and, disposing
of the three children,--a delicate, intelligent little boy and his
two sisters--in the laps of those already seated, the teamster
assisted the mother to a seat at his side. Their presence, it was
evident, excited much interest; for the manner and dress of the little
family betrayed New England birth and culture.

"Your husband," said the owner of the conveyance, as his horses
trotted sturdily along, "rode up with me the other day. He had been
down to the Mississippi waiting for you a whole week, and the landlord
at McGreggor's Landing said he was the bluest man he ever saw, because
you did not arrive."

"I am sorry that he was anxious on my account," replied the wife, with
a merry laugh. "He didn't wish me to venture on the journey alone with
the children, and wrote that he would return for me if I could not
find suitable company; but, not wishing to take him from his labors, I
packed up, and took our darlings along."

"I hope you didn't meet with any accident on the way," observed a man
on the back seat. "You was pretty resolute."

"No; but I came near losing one of my little girls."

"How did it happen?" asked a motherly-looking woman.

"It was in the depot at Springfield. The children were thirsty, and,
charging them not to stir until I came back, I crossed the room for
water. There was a great crowd rushing here and there, trains were
coming and going, all was bustle and confusion, and I hurried, not
having been away but a moment; but little Fannie, my youngest girl,
was missing. Helen, the eldest, had been so taken up with the sights
and sounds about her, that she did not know that her sister was gone.
I was almost frantic with fear, she had so suddenly and completely
disappeared. So, throwing my bonnet back upon my shoulders to attract
attention, I cried at the top of my lungs,--

"My child! my child! I've lost my child!"

"Child lost! child lost!" shouted a number of voices, repeating the
description I gave of her. Nobody seemed to have seen her; and a
terrible dread that I might not find her wrung my heart, when, to my
joy, above the din, I heard some one exclaim,--

"She's found! she's found! Where's the mother?" and a gentleman,
holding her aloft, brought her to me. He was deeply agitated, and
said,--

"Your little girl, madam, came very near being killed. I found her
under the car between two of the wheels, playing with them, saying,
'Car may hurt a me; car may hurt a me.' The last bell had rung, and I
had barely time to drag her off the track when the train started."

"It must have been a great care for you," remarked a passenger, "to
bring your children on so long a journey."

"It was, indeed," she replied. "Generally the worst part of it was in
getting them into the trains: the children are so small, and the rush
of passengers so great, that they were in danger of being trampled on,
or prevented from getting aboard in season."

"Everybody looks out for Number One at such times," said a man. "I
often think that we see more of the selfishness of human nature while
travelling than under any other circumstances. I suppose you were left
to get along as best you could with your little ones."

"Usually," she replied. "Sometimes, however, a stranger, bound the
same way, would give us a helping hand; but often he would blunder so
as to make matters worse. Once I was both amused and frightened. I was
struggling to place my children on a train just starting, and, making
little headway. I called out, 'Will some one help my children into the
cars?' when one of the largest, fattest men I ever saw, who was
panting and puffing from his unusual efforts at hurrying, caught up my
little boy, and, trotting on like an elephant, he struck his foot
against a stone, and came down sprawling into the sand, uttering a
great, wild cry, and giving my little boy a throw at the same time. I
felt sorry for the man, but thought I should die laughing at the queer
figure he cut. And, ungrateful as it seemed, I was obliged, in going
for my boy, to pass around our huge friend, and ride off, leaving him
to pick himself up at his leisure."

There was much merriment at this recital, which was increased by a
portly Englishman behind her saying, in a jolly way,--

"Hi feel as if hi could happreciate that story, mem!"

"But how do you think you'll like living west?" asked the motherly
woman. "It seems to me that the likes of you won't know how to put up
with our rough ways."

"O," replied the clergyman's wife, with an enthusiasm which showed
what manner of spirit she was of, "I did not come out here for
enjoyment, but to cheer and help my husband in laboring for Christ."

"Well," answered the other, wiping a tear from her eye, "the land
knows we need such folks among us; and if we don't have things as nice
as you do your way, I hope you'll find us westerners ready to do what
we can for the good cause. Most of us have seen better times, and have
known what it was to go to meeting every Sunday, and do our mite
towards supporting preaching, and we are willing to do it again."

"See, mother," exclaimed little Helen,--a bright, wide-awake miss of
six years,--"what a large garden!"

The team had passed the irregular ridges of the bluffs extending
inland from the Mississippi, and had attained the summit of a gentle
swell of land commanding an extensive prairie view, and the whole
landscape was bedecked with flowers of every hue and shape. The
child's wondering eyes danced with delight, and she said,--

"Mother, isn't the man who owns this great garden very rich?"

"This don't belong to any one man, my dear," replied her mother,
smiling; "it is one of _God's_ gardens. He planted all these flowers,
and made them grow without anybody's help. All these are wild
flowers."

"O," exclaimed the child, "how good he is!--isn't he, mother? Has God
such a garden where our new home is?"

"I expect he has," she answered; "for out here, my child, it's almost
all garden. You might ride thousands of miles, and not see a stone, or
any sand--nothing but the green grass and the sweet blooming
flowers."

"O," cried Blue-eye, clapping her hands, "I'm so glad we've come
west!--aren't you, mother?"

The passengers were delighted with the prattle of the dear girl, and
the matronly lady who had her in charge could not forbear giving her a
kiss, and said,--

"I hope you will meet with nothing more unpleasant than prairie
flowers."

But just then the child's bright eyes caught sight of a settler
pursuing his lonely way with his gun on his shoulder, his tall figure
standing in bold relief against the sky, although he was several miles
in the distance, and she asked,--

"Mamma, is that a wild man?" And, later, seeing a cow grazing, she
inquired, "Is that a wild cow?"

The next night, about sundown, Mr. Sawyer deposited the missionary's
family at Mr. Lincoln's snug western cottage.

"Well," said Mrs. Lincoln, laughing, as she took her guest's things,
"you've stolen a march on your husband this time."

"Isn't he here?" asked Mrs. Payson, with a disappointed air.

"No," she replied. "He spent a week at the Mississippi, waiting for
you. And, fearing you might get carried by, or injured in leaving the
steamer,--for you know little ceremony is used towards passengers or
their goods,--he visited each boat as it arrived, and had the porter
at the hotel call him up at every boat through the night, inquiring of
the passengers if they had seen a lady of your description with three
young children; and hearing, since he returned, that one resembling
you had gone to the Landing higher up on the river, he went there
yesterday, hoping to meet you, and bring you back with him. He'll
probably get here late this evening; and won't we give him a
surprise?"

It was about nine o'clock when the missionary returned, alone,
anxious, and dejected.

"You don't look as if you found your lost wife and babies," said his
host, sympathizingly.

"No, and I don't know what to make of it. I inquired thoroughly. I
looked the papers over also, but did not find that there had been any
railroad accident of late. I am afraid she has been taken sick on the
way. It was barbarous in me to listen a moment to the idea of her
coming all the way alone, with three children, from Massachusetts to
Minnesota. I ought to have insisted on her remaining at home until I
could have gone for her."

"Perhaps," suggested Mr. Lincoln, "she thought it wasn't prudent to
venture on such a journey, and wrote you so, but the letter has
miscarried."

"I know her too well to think so," responded the minister. "She has
started on her way here. She had decided to do so as a matter of duty;
and, having made her mind up on that point, she would come right on if
she met with a railroad accident every other train--if she is a
delicate little body."

"Well, you look tired enough to drop," said Mrs. Lincoln, abruptly,
turning her head to conceal a smile. "I think you had better retire
early."

The clergyman was quite taken aback at this piece of advice; but Mr.
Lincoln relieved his astonishment by saying,--

"My wife, hoping that you might be cheered by the arrival of your
family, has been fixing up your room a bit, and I suppose she won't
rest to-night unless she sees how you like the improvements."

And Mrs. Lincoln opening the door into his apartment, the missionary
saw before him his three children, sleeping peacefully in their nice
beds, and his wife seated in a rocking-chair, exercising a world of
self-control, in order to carry out the plot of surprising him.




CHAPTER X.

"NO WHISKEY AT THIS RAISING!"


If the Scottish bard found it a hard experience that

                'The best laid schemes of mice and men
                        Gang oft agla'

in staid old Scotland, how would he have sung if his lot had been cast
amid the vicissitudes of frontier life on an American prairie?

We speak of the uncertainties of all earthly expectations where
society organized, helps man in a thousand ways to achieve his plans;
but there is nothing settled in a new country: everything is in
embryo, and therefore disappointments are indefinitely multiplied.
When the immigrant arrives at his destination, he soon finds that his
most reasonable projects prove to be the veriest air-castles, and that
his reliance must be on Providence and his own strong arm. This state
of things is specially trying to the man of small means and
unaccustomed to physical toil, as was the case with Mr. Payson. The
settlers, especially those of religious character, had made, in true
western style, many and generous promises to induce him to live among
them. They designed to keep their engagements with him; but a thousand
contingencies were continually arising, which they could not foresee,
to render the fulfilment of their agreements impossible. But perhaps
no failure in this direction had tried the missionary so much as that
connected with the erection of a dwelling-house. Mr. Palmer had
voluntarily made him the offer of money for that purpose, and if any
man could be depended upon, it was he; but he had invested his funds
in the new town. He was a prudent man, and when the proposal was made
him by the two proprietors to join them in the enterprise, he was
disinclined to do so. They were irreligious men, stirring, energetic
workers, but devoid of interest in "things unseen," and therefore
could not be expected to care for the present and future moral
condition of the settlement. Yet we should do them the justice to say
that they were not indifferent to the religious welfare of their
village, only that, not being religious men, they would not take the
matter in charge themselves; they needed a leader, both to plan and to
set a wholesome example, and this was one reason for their asking Mr.
Palmer to become a partner. This reason was a weighty one with him;
but before deciding the question, he consulted with Mr. Payson.

Laying the whole matter before him, he asked,--

"What do you think of my engaging in this thing?"

"I do hope," he answered, "that, if you can make it pecuniarily
successful, you will become a town owner. I should feel that I had a
pillar to lean upon in all my endeavors for the social and religious
good of this people, and it seems to me that there can be no risk in
it; we have everything here to make a town,--water-power, timber,
limestone quarries for building material, abundance of clean prairie
land for agricultural purposes, and sooner or later a railroad must
pass very near here, as it is on the great travelled route to the
important points west and north. Emigration is coming in well; we have
a religious meeting established, and I hope soon we shall have a
school."

"That is the way it seems to me," said Mr. Palmer; "and it appears
also, that I might do a great deal of good by using aright the power a
town owner might have."

So he decided to make the investment. But mishap after mishap occurred
to thwart the enterprises of the town owners; and while their expenses
were large, the returns were so small that Mr. Palmer came to the
preacher one day, and with emotion said,--

"Mr. Payson, I fear I shall have to disappoint you about the money I
promised to let you have for the building of your cottage."

This was a heavy blow to the missionary, and his friend knew too well
that it would be, for Mr. Payson had set his heart on having a
comfortable home provided for his family when they should arrive. Many
a pleasant bit of correspondence had passed between himself and wife
on the subject of the pretty white cottage, on the eighty-acre lot
adjoining the town, and the joy of meeting her was overshadowed by the
thought that she had come to a homeless wilderness, while expecting
something so different; and when she asked repeatedly if the cottage
was ready, and when he was going to take her to see it, in his
unhappiness he avoided a direct reply, which, with the ominous silence
of the good friends by whom they were entertained, led her to
conjecture how matters stood; and one day she lifted the weight in a
measure from his heart by saying,--

"It would be very strange, while almost everybody in a new country are
obliged to live in log cabins, if we should be enough better off to
put up a framed house. I don't believe you have been able to yet; it
is too much to expect. But never mind; if others can live within log
walls for the sake of making money, we certainly can for a higher
motive."

"Just like yourself," said he, gratefully, relating the facts as we
have recited them.

"But what are we going to do?" she inquired; "we ought not to think of
accepting the hospitality of this generous-hearted family much longer.
Their house is already so crowded, it puts them to great
inconvenience."

"I am aware of it," said her husband. "Mr. Palmer has a little cabin
which he has offered me for temporary use until I can put up something
on my claim; but it is so rough and lonely, that on your account I
have not felt like saying anything to you about it."

"O," said she, merrily, "do take me there to-day; it would be so
romantic to live in a log cabin."

So, their host's team being chartered, they went to look at the
"rent." It was a funny wee loggery, hastily put up for pre-emption
purpose, standing in a small, enclosed field near the river, two miles
from town, the nearest neighbor being Mr. Jones, who lived a mile and
a half farther down the stream.

Mr. Palmer, in anticipation of the visit, had been there before them,
and put in a whole glass window, laid the rough boards, that
constituted the floor, more closely, and put up some shelves for a
cupboard in a corner.

"This is elegance itself!" exclaimed the little woman, laughing
heartily: "get a few chairs, and a stove, husband, and we'll move
right in; and see," she added, looking out of the door; "there are
potatoes here that have not been dug--quite a crop: perhaps you can
buy the right to use them."

"O, yes," replied her husband; "brother Palmer says we can have the
use of the cabin free, and all there is about it."

"The fish in the river, too, I suppose," said she, stepping to the
fence, and peering over the river brink.

"I reckon you won't get fish enough to get sick on them," said a voice
near; and, Mr. Jones emerged from a clump of bushes, his gun on his
shoulder.

"This is our neighbor," said the minister; "my wife, Mr. Jones."

"Looking up a cage to put your bird in?" asked the squatter.

The minister replied affirmatively.

"You found that eighty-acre lot just as I told ye--didn't ye?" he
asked.

"Precisely."

"And did your 'brother Smith' give it up like a Christian?" he
pursued.

"I suppose I am the proprietor of it now," said the minister,
good-naturedly.

"And he didn't charge you anything for giving up what was not his--did
he?"

"No," said the missionary; "he did not charge me anything for the
claim, although he seemed to think it right that I should give him
something for the improvements."

"Improvements! Yes, I suppose he expects some pay for the saw logs he
stole from the lot, while he had acres on acres of timber of his own.
It's no more'n fair that a Christian man should be paid for the lumber
he plunders from other folks' land. You paid him for that, of
course?"

"O, no," replied Mr. Payson; "he didn't bring in his bill for that. He
had cleared and fenced the ten-acre piece over the river, and he said
he didn't wish to lose his labor."

"Well," said Mr. Jones, almost fiercely, "I wasn't aware, elder, that
you employed him to do that little job; I thought that was done last
year, 'fore we knew anything 'bout you in these parts."

"Yes, yes," said the missionary, coloring.

"And I rather think," he continued, "that he got his pay for his work,
as he expected to, in what he took from the land. I never saw better
corn and wheat, let alone the potatoes and the pumpkins that he raised
on that river bottom; and as to the rails, they belong where he took
them from, that eighty-acre lot that he robbed and impoverished,
tilling the soil in the summer, and cutting down the best trees in the
winter, and working what he didn't care about into rails; and now he
turns around,--after having skimmed your milk, when he had plenty of
his own,--and tells you, as a Christian brother, that you orter pay
him for taking off the cream, and making butter of it for his own
table. May I ask what he charged you for the operation?"

"He asked," said the minister, "eighty dollars, but concluded to take
thirty."

"And when you form your church you'll choose him first deacon--won't
you?" said the squatter, sneeringly.

"Neighbor Jones," said the minister, quietly, "I find that Mr. Smith's
character is pretty well understood among the settlers. From all I can
learn, I judge that he has never been a member of a church, but is one
of a too large class, who try to palm themselves off on religious
people, that they may the better carry out their own wicked and
selfish ends. I did not pay him the thirty dollars because he had a
right to ask it of me, but because I had rather sacrifice something
than to expose the spiritual welfare of this people by giving an
occasion for a quarrel, however unjustly; and, mark me, the time will
come when that money, small as the amount is, will be a burden to the
conscience of that man. But," he added, suddenly changing the
subject, "we expect to have a raising on my lot day after to-morrow.
Cannot I rely on you for a lift?"

"Ah," said he, "what are you going to put up there--a framed house?"

"O, no," replied the minister, smiling, "only a few logs. The town
owners are going to let me take down the log house they have used on
the other side of the river,--as the logs are so well seasoned,--and
put them up on my place; and, wife,"--turning to her,--"we shall have
to depend on you for refreshments for the occasion."

"You have given me short notice," she replied, "but I can have things
ready if you can manage to get supplies, and a stove up in season."

"If you want a little help in getting started here," said Mr. Jones,
"I'll send up my Tom; I guess he'd like to lend you a hand."

"Could he come to-day?" asked Mrs. Payson.

"I'll send him right along," said the squatter, as he bent his steps
towards home.

"What are we going to do for a stove?" asked the wife, as soon as he
was out of sight.

"That'll be forthcoming," said the minister.

Tom, having made his appearance, was requested by Mr. Payson to take
the team and go to town, and say to Mr. Palmer that they had decided
to move into the cabin, and would like to get settled before night;
which message brought Mr. Palmer back with Tom, accompanied by a
wagon-load, containing a large cooking-stove, a bag of flour, some
chairs, a little crockery, and a supply of various eatables. And by
nightfall the missionary family were domiciled in the frontier cabin;
and the next morning you would have thought the missionary's wife
already quite 'westernized,' with her neat calico and tidy apron, busy
in her preparations for the house-raising.

"I don't mean to stay in a borrowed house a great while," she said.
"Husband, how soon do you calculate that we can be housekeeping in our
own cabin?"

"It will take some weeks, do our best," he answered.

"Well," she rejoined, "I'll set the time four weeks from to-day; and
if it isn't ready then, I shall go into it if I have to leave you
behind."

But how slowly everything dragged, except the raising! The settlers
went into that with right good will; men and teams were busy drawing
the logs, while experienced hands placed them properly upon each
other, till the ridge-pole crowned the whole. Then they sat down on
the grass to partake of the tempting eatables that Tom and Mr. Payson
had brought on the ground. There were the light biscuits and the
golden butter, nice venison steaks for which they were indebted to the
rifle of Mr. Jones, dried apple turnovers, and the sheets of crisp
gingerbread, loaf cake, and fragrant coffee.

"We don't get any whiskey at this raising!" said Mr. Palmer, nudging
his next neighbor.

"No," he replied; "and it's an example that I hope will be often
followed."

Then there was the door to be made and hung, and the windows to be
put in, and the crevices between the logs to be mortared, and the
floors laid--long and tedious operations, where everybody was
over-busy, and labor could be hired neither "for love nor money." Mr.
Payson found that much of the work had to be done by himself, with
the occasional help of Tom. He was city-bred, and his bodily
strength feeble; but necessity obliged him to perform prodigies of
teaming, lifting, and joinering, and even of quarrying stone for the
well that was being dug. A few weeks had wrought a wonderful
change in the man of books; his study was wherever he chanced to be;
his white hands had become horny and browned, his pale face
tanned. His retiring habits had given place to a broad sociality,
his diffidence to a generous self-reliance, and it seemed to him
that he could do and dare almost anything. From early morning till
late at night he worked to get his log home ready, while his wife
and little ones remained in the solitary cabin by the riverside.
It was a long walk for him, however after toiling all day; and
when the sky was overcast at nightfall, he was in danger of
getting lost. This gave his wife much uneasiness; then she feared
that he might meet some prowling wolf, or other beast, in the
darkness; and when he was very late, she would be sure to think he
was lost, and would ring her house-bell, which consisted of a tin pan,
on which she would drum vigorously with the stove-lifter. She said
he would recognize that sound, she thought, at a great distance.

But the four weeks went by, and on account of the difficulty of
getting lumber, and other necessary articles, the roof was still
unshingled, and the floor only half laid. The wife, like most women,
had a very good memory for dates. The log cabin they occupied was
open, and the prairie winds cold and piercing, and for a few days she
had been quite ill; but that morning, after her unsuspicious husband
had left for his joinering, Tom might have been seen guiding a yoke of
cattle, attached to a cart, into the enclosure, which, after much
"geeing" and "gee-hawing," he managed to make stand before the door.

"Charlie," said he, as that urchin made his appearance from the inside
of the cart, "you stand by the cattle while I put the things aboard."

And bringing out a barrel filled with crockery and other things, which
Mrs. Payson had clandestinely packed for the occasion, and the
wash-boiler full of eatables, and hanging the chairs over the cart
stakes, he took down the bedsteads, and placed them in a manner that
was highly satisfactory to the energetic minister's wife, and tying up
the bed-clothes in great bundles, deposited them also; and saying to
Mrs. Payson, "I shall have to fix an easy place for you to ride, as
you've been sick," he laid the hard beds in the empty space which he
had left for that purpose in the cart, with the feather beds above,
saying,--

"There, you won't feel the motion much now;" and assisting her to
mount, she was enthroned on her downy seat on the top of the load,
with the children in high glee by her side.

The steers, which were notoriously unruly, as if aware that they had a
minister's wife aboard, behaved with becoming decorum under Tom's wise
supervision.

Now, it chanced that some careless hunter, firing into the dry prairie
grass on the other side of the town, had started a fire. Mrs. Payson
had noticed in the morning that there was a smell of burning in the
air, and a hazy appearance, but had attached no particular importance
to it; but as they approached the town, a scene of great magnificence
burst upon her. The fires, driven with velocity before the wind, had
swept over the prairies, and reached the belt of woods, in a portion
of which were the eighty acres that her husband was at work upon. The
flames were crackling and roaring in the forests, burning up the dry
underbrush, shooting to the tops of the old dead pines, so that the
scene being constantly on her left, was more or less in view for most
of the distance.

"What shall we do?" asked Tom, in alarm. "Hadn't we better go back?"

"Do you think the fire has reached my husband's claim?" she answered.

Tom scanned the appearance of the smoke with a practised eye, and at
length replied,--

"No; it's not got as far as there yet."

"Do you think it will?" she inquired, anxiously.

"If the wind does not change, it must before a great while," he said,
"although it will have to cross the road, which will backen it some."

"Would it burn up the cabin, then?" she inquired.

"I am afraid it would," he answered.

"Well," said she, firmly, "I said I would go into that cabin in four
weeks, and if it's not burnt down, I shall keep my word. At any rate
we shall be in season to see the fire!" Then she added, looking grave,
"I do hope, if it is the Lord's will, that the fire will be checked in
time, my husband has toiled so hard."

As the cart turned up the main street of the town, she caught sight
of the cabin that was to be her future home, and she saw her husband,
too, at the same moment, for there he sat on the roof, gazing at the
fire, which seemed to be dying out. He heard the rumbling of the
wheels as they drew near, and as he caught sight of the
picturesque-looking object approaching, he called out,--

"Why, what under the canopy have we here? Wife, and babies, and
household effects! What does this mean? You are not going to emigrate
farther west--are you?"

"If you'll _de_scend from your elevated position," she replied,
cheerily, "I'll _con_descend to inform you. Now," she added, "you know
I told you, husband, I should move into the cabin to-day; and did you
ever know me to break my word?"

"But," said he, looking disconcerted, "I'm not ready for you yet; the
floor isn't half laid."

"Well," she replied, "I can't stand it to have you sweating up here
all alone at your task, running the risk of being devoured by the
wolves, or losing your way at night because you think the cabin isn't
comfortable enough for me. Why, you are as particular about having
everything done just so about this cabin, as you used to be, east, in
having every word exactly in its place when you wrote your sermons.
Please, now, just help Tom unload, and set these things in, and I'll
have tea ready directly, and we'll be where we can cheer you a bit.
But what about this fire?"

"Our cabin has had a very narrow escape."

"Yes," said Tom, coming up, "I've been out to look, and the fire just
came up to your line, and then stopped."

Mr. Payson was deeply affected by the intelligence, for, knowing that
no human power could stay the advancing flames, upon the cabin top he
had been praying that the wind might change. Was it in answer to his
silent petitions that it had taken place in so timely a manner?




CHAPTER XI.

OLD MRS. SKINFLINT IN TROUBLE.--LOST IN THE WOODS.


There is no man so bad as he might be--a fact that everybody knows,
but that most are apt to forget in their estimate of those who have
offended their sense of right.

Mr. Smith had his virtues as well as faults; perhaps more of the
latter than the former; but there were some mollifying circumstances
to be taken into the account in the summing up of his character. His
natural love of money had been stimulated and intensified by the
malign influence of his wife. She was miserly when he married her. To
keep what she had, and get what she could, was her ruling passion;
besides which she had a passion _for_ ruling. And often, when her
husband's gentler heart would be touched by a tale of suffering, and
his hand be opened to relieve the distressed, would she interfere to
prevent the indulgence of the benevolent impulse; and now, after some
thirty years' matrimonial moulding, he had become so assimilated to
her grasping spirit, and so accustomed to yield to her stronger will,
that his dealings in business made him appear worse than he really
was. In the sale of the "eighty-acre lot" to the missionary, about
which much indignation was felt in the settlement, Mrs. Smith was the
chief actor. Mr. Smith was the monkey employed to pull the chestnuts
out of the fire, although, it must be confessed, he relished the
chestnuts. She was a crafty woman, and kept out of sight in the
transaction while she urged him on, so that people saw only Mr. Smith
in the wrong-doing, when, if they could have peeped behind the
curtain, they would have seen that his "better half" was the more
guilty.

The thirty dollars which Mr. Smith finally consented to take for the
"improvements on the claim," Mr. Payson was unable to pay all at once;
he was, therefore, subjected to many vexatious duns for the balance.
Fearing that, at last, her husband would relent, and the debt might
not all be realized, Mrs. Smith resolved to turn collector herself.
So, putting on her best cap, and her faded black alpaca, she made her
way through the woods to the missionary's cabin.

When she reached it, she found no one but Tom and Bub within; for Mr.
Lincoln had called with his team, and taken the family to dine at his
house.

"Is the minister to home?" she asked.

"No," replied Tom.

"When will he be back?"

"I don't know," said Tom; "but he expects to attend a wedding this
evening, and, as it's now 'most four, I expect him every minute."

"Then," said she, "I guess I'll take a chair and wait. My husband has
a small bill agin him, and I thought maybe he'd just as lief pay it
now as any time."

She was garrulous and inquisitive, plying Tom with all sorts of
questions about the minister's family, much to the annoyance of the
lad, who, remembering that there were certain errands yet to be done
that afternoon,--for Tom was now often at the cabin assisting the
minister,--he asked her if she would look after Bub while he went to
the village, saying he thought it likely the family would return
before he did. The old lady rather liked the arrangement, as it would
give her a chance to inspect the housekeeping of the minister's wife;
and, watching Tom till he was well into town, she commenced her
examinations. First she opened the closet door to see how the dishes
were arranged, for she had heard that once on a time the good man's
lady had committed the great crime of writing a book; and she had
often remarked that "anybody that could waste their time in sich a way
must be a master slack housekeeper." To her disappointment, however,
she found that quite as good order, and rather more taste, reigned
there than in her own pantry, but was relieved again a moment at
finding an unwashed plate.

"Just as I thought," she muttered, with a grunt of satisfaction.

Having finished her leisurely inspection of the cupboard, during which
she smelled of the bread to see if it was sour, broke off a bit of the
cake to see if it was extravagant, and sucked some plum sauce from the
ends of her fingers, she started to peer under the bed to ascertain if
there was any dust there, when, hearing a noise, supposing that the
minister had come, she turned and closed the closet door, and reseated
herself, wiping her mouth with her apron as she did so. This change of
posture brought her into full view of the stairs leading to the loft
above, which humble place, under the roof, the clergyman used for a
study when he wished to be _very much_ retired. On the stairs,
descending with solemn step and slow, was Bub, with the minister's old
hat on, which he kept above his eyes by one chubby hand, and the
minister's steel-bowed glasses resting on his nose, and the good man's
dressing-gown trailing magnificently behind. Bub's manner showed that
he felt his consequence much increased by his clerical outfit, and
the benignant gravity of his face was edifying to behold.

"Goodness gracious!" exclaimed the old lady; "what on airth you up to,
you imp o' Satan? Can't you berhave in the minister's house?" and,
seizing the urchin as he landed, she only ceased shaking him as the
spectacles dropped to the floor.

This reception was wholly unexpected to poor Bub, and, as she relieved
him of his ministerial vestments, he sobbed indignantly,--

"Now Bub go wite away, and never come back no more!" and, opening the
door, he marched resolutely out.

The elderly caller had now the congenial duty to do of restoring the
minister's apparel to its proper place overhead; and, glancing out of
the window, to be sure nobody was coming, she ascended to the
missionary's _sanctum sanctorum_.

Now, Rev. Mr. Payson, in his varied pursuits of preacher, pastor,
house-carpenter, stone-mason, farmer, and doctor,--for, having skill
in medicine, the sick depended somewhat on his medical care,--he was
quite apt to leave his uninviting study in disorder, especially when
suddenly called from home. Moreover, like the other cabins in a new
country, the house was overrun with field mice, making it, as Mr.
Payson sometimes said, "dangerous to sleep with one's mouth open, lest
a mouse might mistake it for his hole, and pop in." Whether, however,
such a suffocating casualty would occur or not, the wee animals chased
each other along the logs, ransacked the closet, scampered across the
beds, nibbling at everything that tempted their sharp little teeth;
even the clergyman's books and papers were mutilated by them most
irreverently.

The sight of the sheets and bits of writing paper, the news journals,
and old reviews,--for the missionary, unable to take the current
publications, read and re-read the old ones with a mournful
satisfaction,--and the other signs of confusion which prevailed, and
which so annoyed his wife, were as refreshing to Mrs. Smith's eyes as
the first glimpse of land to Columbus.

"Zactly as I expected," she ejaculated, lifting her hands in horror.
"I alluz hearn tell that these ere lit'ry women are a shiftless set. I
should think it would worry a man's life out of his body to be jined
to sich a hussy. Why, there's my Betsy Ann; she ken go a visitin' more
'n half the time, and her husband never said boo agin her house-work;
an' I've known lots o' women what could embroider, an' play the piana,
an' make heaps o' calls, an' attind balls an' sich till enymost
mornin', an' they'd no more think o' wastin' their time in writin' a
book than cuttin' their heads off! But duzzn't them books look pooty
on them shelves? I should think it would make the minister's head
split if he knows all that's in them volums; an' they do say he's
ter'ble larned. Well, I mustn't stay here no longer, though it's jist
as I expected." And, returning to the room below, she lifted her hands
again in astonishment as she saw by the clock that it was five. "I
guess John'll have to git his own fodder to-night, or go without. He's
used to it, though. I brings my man up not to expect a woman to
drudge, drudge, about house. But, mercy me!" she exclaimed, "where's
that child gone to? I warrant he's in some mischief;" and, opening the
door, she called,--

"Bub, Bub! come inter the huss!"

But Bub did not answer. So she went around the cabin, but could see
nothing of him, and, thinking that he would not come because it was
she that called him, she added,--

"Come right in now; Tom wants yer."

There was only a slight clearing around the cabin, and then came a
thick growth of bushes, and beyond, the woods on either hand, save the
path in the direction of the town. It was but a few rods to the
nearest house in the village, and she hurried there to make inquiries,
for she was becoming anxious for the child. But the children, playing
near by, said that Bub had not passed that way, so, running back, she
instituted a new search in the vicinity of the cabin, calling him as
before, and receiving no answer; and, as there was a wide cart track
leading into the woods from the cabin door, thinking it natural for
the child to stray that way, she hastened in that direction.

We have said that Mr. Smith had his virtues as well as weaknesses;
and, of course, his wife was not "_totally_ depraved," in the sense in
which that much-controverted term is _not_ intended by those who hold
that man is naturally sinful. And, as she had borne children, a
motherly solicitude was now awakened in her heart for Bub, and she
pressed anxiously down the path, while the deepening twilight steadily
increased the gloom that lingered in the shadows of the lofty trees.
The cart track grew less distinct as she advanced; and, as she had not
found Bub, she concluded to return and alarm the neighbors, but found
her course impeded on every side by the thick underbrush, for she had
lost the main path. With desperate efforts she pushed aside the
strong-armed boughs, and struck once more the cart track, as she
supposed; but, alas for her, she was mistaken. Her head had become
bewildered, and she was penetrating into the depths of the forest. On,
on she urged her steps, wondering that she did not come in sight of
the minister's cabin, when, to her delight, she heard a sound like the
crying of a child. Now a heavy load was lifted from her mind.

"I must be nearing the cabin," thought she; "and that's Bub;" and she
called with unusual tenderness, "Bub, Bub! Where are you?"

She listened intently, expecting a response, and heard again the same
sound, but, strangely, farther off. So she quickened her speed,
calling the boy with renewed vigor. Wearied at last in her fruitless
endeavors, she stopped to rest a moment, and collect her scattered
faculties. She was an apt calculator in money matters, and that
faculty, summoned into exercise now, convinced her that she had passed
over many times the distance needed, had she been going in the right
direction; and the horrible conclusion that she was lost in the woods
thrilled her with terror. She recollected also that there had been
stories told of late of a panther's voice being heard in those woods,
and that it sounded like the crying of a child. This increased her
fear.

While she was considering what to do in her extremity, a short, quick
bark, far in the forest behind her, succeeded by a prolonged howl, the
bloodthirsty cry of the "timber wolf,"--which, when once heard, can
never be forgotten,--broke on her ear. She had lived too long in the
wilderness not to know what that meant, and she fled with wondrous
swiftness down the path, on, on, she knew not whither. Her trembling
limbs began to fail; but again the fiendish wolf-cry resounded,
succeeded by that of another, and yet another,--showing that the call
of the first had brought others to the chase,--made her forget her
weakness, and, like a spirit, away she sped, once more, on the race
for life. The race, however, was an unequal one, and its fearful
termination was soon staring her in the face, as she heard the
ferocious creatures drawing near; when, to her relief, she saw ahead a
small, untenanted cabin. It was a shanty used by the woodsmen in the
winter while felling trees. The door was off its hinges; and, passing
swiftly in, in the agony of despair, she glanced around for a
hiding-place. But the room was equally open to the wolves as to
herself. Instantly, in a manner that seemed almost superhuman, she
passed up the side of the cabin to a beam laid for an upper floor, and
stood there, clinging, with her bony fingers to the wall, as
motionless as a marble statue, while the wolves, disappointed of their
prey, sat on the floor below, lapping their hungry jaws, and watching
her till dawn, where she was found by a party who had been searching
for her all night. She was speechless when rescued, and utterly
unable for a time to give any account of herself. Her first inquiry,
however, when she could remember what had happened, was for little
Bub.

"I guess," said one of the men, soothingly, "he has turned up all
right afore now."

But as she insisted on going to the minister's to ascertain if Bub was
safe, they assisted her there, where were assembled a number of women,
among whom was Mrs. Jones, anxious about the lost child, for no trace
of him had been discovered.

When Bub was so unceremoniously disrobed of his priestly garments by
Mrs. Smith's skinny hand, highly offended at so gross an invasion of
his rights and dignities, to console himself he determined to run home
and tell his mother of the outrage.

Now the "make of the land," back of the missionary's cabin, was much
like that near his father's, and therefore he took his way in that
direction, instead of the one Mrs. Smith had surmised. He had taken
quite a walk when he saw the stream that divided the minister's lot.
Remembering that there was a river back of his mother's cabin, he
concluded that his home was on the other side of the stream before
him. The cornstalks, too, left standing in the cleared ground
opposite, were in sight, and they resembled the corn that Tom had cut
and stacked. So he trudged up and down the bank to find a way to
cross, till he came to a tree which had been felled for that purpose,
and constituted the only bridge, the topmost boughs of which rested on
the other side, just as the stream was bridged below his father's
cabin, but upon which he had often been charged not to venture. Bub
had been so often charged on this point, and impressed with the
danger, that he did not forget it now; and, while he amused himself
with dropping sticks into the water, and watching to see them carried
along by the current, he called,--

"Mother, come, get Bub, if you don't want him drownded up."

And, as his mother did not make her appearance, he shouted for Sarah,
till, as it was getting dusk, he felt afraid to linger longer, and
mounted the tree. It was a dizzy height above the water, and Bub's
curly pate would whirl whenever he glanced below; so, as he could not
walk steadily, he sat down, and tried to hitch along as he had seen
Sarah do. This was not much better for him, and he began creeping on
all fours; and, with many an admonitory slip, which served to make him
the more careful, he had got nearly across, when he fell, holding his
breath from fright. Fortunately, however, he had reached the lower
limbs, and the friendly branches held him until he was able to regain
the trunk of the tree; and ere long his little feet pressed _terra
firma_.

The cultivated ground was not fenced next the river, the bank being
sufficiently steep to keep out stray cattle, and Bub found some
difficulty in scaling it; but as he was hungry for supper, and had
something of a will of his own, despite his short legs and frequent
tumbles, at last he succeeded. And, wandering around in the cornfield,
vainly seeking his mother's cabin, baffled in his efforts, and finding
that crying was of no avail, tired, frightened, and dispirited, he
leaned his head against a clump of cornstalks, and, falling gently
from the support to the soft soil, he dropped asleep as the darkness
came on.

But where was Tom? When he returned from doing the errands, he was
surprised at not finding either Mrs. Smith or Bub at the minister's,
and was standing undecided what to do, when the clergyman drove up.
Tom immediately stated his perplexity.

"You don't suppose the woman went home, leaving Bub here alone, and
the child has strayed away?" suggested Mrs. Payson, apprehensively.

"I scarcely think a woman of her age would be so imprudent," replied
her husband. "She may, however, have gone to the village, and taken
the child with her for safe keeping. It would be well, Tom, to go down
and see."

Tom was hurrying along, when a lad called out,--

"Did the old woman find Bub?" and he related how she came there in
search of him. This startled Tom, and, hastening back, he told Mr.
Payson what he had heard.

"Perhaps, then," said the minister, "the old lady got tired of waiting
for me, and took Bub home with her. You may take the team and ride
over there."

Finding that Mr. Smith had not seen his wife, Tom at once concluded
that there must be something seriously wrong; and he said,--

"I was told at the village that your wife was there, trying to find
Bub. It may be they are both lost in the woods. Now, if you will get
the settlers about here together, I will rouse the villagers, and we
will make a search."

We have already described the finding of the lost woman.

The ground on the side of the river next to the minister's cabin had
been looked over repeatedly, and no one seemed to think it possible
that the child had crossed the river, and the conclusion came to be
general that he had either been carried off by a wild beast, or fallen
into the water, and been drowned; and preparations were made for
dragging the stream for the body, when one of the party saw a bit of
cloth, which Tom recognized as torn from Bub's dress, flaunting from a
twig on the tree-bridge.

"He must be on the other side!" cried Tom; and, with new hope, the
party rushed to explore the field, shouting his name.

"Here I be!" answered a childish voice; and they found him seated on
the ground, composedly picking the kernels from an ear of corn, the
channels which the tears had ploughed on his unwashed cheeks being the
only evidence of the sorrows through which he had passed; and he said,
with the air of one whose feelings had been wounded by undeserved
neglect,--

"I hasn't had any dinner."

Some theologians tell us that the sinful should never be addressed
through their fears; that love can only reform the erring. Perhaps
Mrs. Smith was unlike the rest of the race; but the terrors of that
night wrought a change in her; and Mr. Payson was surprised one day by
Mr. Smith's calling at his cabin with a fine quarter of beef, saying,
as he lugged it in,--

"I've been killing an ox, elder; and wife thought, if you wouldn't be
offended, that I'd better bring you down a piece;" adding, as he rose
to go, "Here's that due-bill that you gave me for the improvements on
the ten acres. Wife says you've paid enough on it; so I've receipted
it, and will call it square, if you will. And, by the way, when you
are out of butter, just send over to our house; we can spare you a few
pounds, now and then, just as well as not."




CHAPTER XII.

FIRE AND FLOOD.


The sum which had been pledged by the settlers was not sufficient for
the support of the missionary's family; and although the treasurer
exerted himself to the utmost, he could only collect a portion of what
was due from those whose names were on the subscription paper. No one
felt the inconvenience of this more than the clergyman's wife. She was
a good manager, and had a wonderful faculty for making "one dollar go
as far as three, and getting up meals out of nothing," as her husband
often remarked. But it must be confessed, that with the keen appetites
brought to them on the wings of the prairie winds, the little
household sometimes rose from the scantily-furnished table hungry for
more.

Mr. Payson, under these circumstances, would comfort her with
anticipations of future abundance. They knew, indeed, that most of the
settlers had newly arrived, and had everything to buy, as they had not
been long enough settled to raise anything from the ground. But a
year had now elapsed, and many acres of the rich soil had been turned
over and planted, and there was prospect of abundant returns. The
missionary, being unaccustomed to farming, and wishing to devote his
energies, as far as practicable, to the spiritual interests of his
growing charge, had let out his tillable ten-acre lot to a neighbor,
to be cultivated on shares, reserving a little spot for himself, which
he had planted to early potatoes, and a good variety of garden
vegetables. As the one who carried on the rest of the piece was an
intelligent and experienced farmer, and had facilities for the work in
the way of teams and men, the clergyman felt that he might reasonably
calculate on a supply of corn and wheat, to which crops the ground had
been devoted. And nowhere was there promise of a larger yield than on
that quick and productive river bottom. The corn grew to a prodigious
height, crowded with mammoth ears, and the wheat emulated the corn;
while the squash and pumpkin vines conducted as if on a race to see
which would beat in the number and size of their fruit; and Mr.
Payson's pet sorghum--a species of sugar-cane--shot up to a marvellous
perfection. It is true that a neighbor's unruly cattle had broken into
the enclosure a number of times; and a contrary sow, with her lively
family of eleven, had also made sundry plundering raids, causing the
minister considerable trouble in driving and keeping out the
intruders; but he had already a fine supply of seasoned oak rails
under way for perfecting the fences; and he cheerily said to his
wife,--

"Another year, and I'll defy the unruliest animals in the settlement
to steal an ear of corn or a potato from my lot."

Summer had now faded into late autumn, and one day the farmer, who had
charge of the field, called at Mr. Payson's, looking very dejected.

"Elder," said he, "our farming this year is going to be losing
business."

"Why, what's the matter?" asked the clergyman.

"You see," he replied, "most of the settlers, like myself, came from a
warmer climate than this. We were told also that the growing season
was as long here as there, and brought our choicest seed with us. But
there is not time for it to ripen; and our corn will not do to grind,
nor will it keep, it is so green. It is a great disappointment to me;
but most of the neighbors are in the same situation."

Words cannot describe what sad tidings these were to the missionary.

"The wheat is good--is it not?" he inquired.

"Yes; but you know there was little sown, as the ground was best
adapted to corn."

So it turned out that more was realized from the half acre cultivated
by the missionary, notwithstanding the old farmer laughed at his city
style of doing things, than from the nine and a half acres besides.
And the year of plenty had to be deferred for another twelvemonth.

That eighty acres!--how much comfort the missionary and his wife took
in the thought that it was, or rather soon would be, theirs! How many
times they admired its pleasant, rolling aspect, and weighed its
prospective value! And the pretty grove near the cabin, with its
straight-growing trees--what cosy walks they had with the children in
its leafy shade! What enjoyment in noting the progress made in
clearing out the underbrush and trimming the trees of superfluous
branches!

"If the place was only paid for," said the husband one day, "I should
be glad. Let me see. Eighty acres, at one dollar and twenty-five cents
an acre,--the government price,--would be one hundred dollars. I think
I'll act upon Mr. Jones's suggestion, and sell some of the timber
across the river, and pre-empt immediately. I have been offered thirty
dollars an acre for the privilege of cutting off the wood, and, at
that rate, three and a half acres would be more than enough."

So the sale was effected, and, with the hundred dollars in his pocket,
the clergyman started one morning on horseback for the Land Office,
thirty-seven miles distant. A horseback ride across a Minnesota
prairie is highly exhilarating, and both horse and rider were in good
spirits. Seemingly half borne on by a sweeping prairie wind, Mr.
Payson reached his destination in some five hours, in season for an
early tea; and the next morning he was conducted to the Land Office by
a lawyer acquaintance, and, with a witness at hand to prove what he
affirmed, stated, under oath, that he had, on the land he wished to
pre-empt, a cabin and other improvements to the amount that the law
required; and then, having paid his hundred dollars, he started
towards home with a light heart.

The day became dark and cloudy; and, as there was only a faint cart
track across the prairies, the minister found, in the course of the
afternoon, that he had lost his way. There were no cabins at which he
could retrieve his error, and, after many vain endeavors to find the
track, he let his horse take his own course; and, carrying his master
under low-branched trees and through thorny thickets, across a swamp,
he brought him out at last by a much shorter route than he had taken
in going, on the farther bank of the river, near the town.

As the clergyman neared the village, he noticed heavy volumes of smoke
ascending. Then he saw Mr. Palmer with a force of men busily engaged
in checking a fire that was careering through the bushes. There was a
wall of flame between him and them. Striking the road, he dashed
through the glowing boundary; and Mr. Palmer, beckoning to him,
said,--

"We have rather bad news to tell you, though not so bad as it might
have been. A fire commenced near your place yesterday afternoon, and
came near burning the town."

"A fire there!" ejaculated the minister. "How did it start?"

"I cannot stop to tell you," said his bachelor friend; "but your wife,
when you get home, will tell you all about it. Had it not been for
her, we should have been swept away."

What a sight met the clergyman's eye as he came into the town! The
entire area, before so like a lawn, looked as if the contents of a
large ink-pot had been spread over it. He was relieved, however, to
see that his cabin and the other houses were still standing; but his
wife met him with a depressed bearing quite in contrast to her usual
sprightly manner. It so struck to his heart to see how badly she felt,
that--although his glance from the saddle showed that the flames had
not spared his beloved grove, and had consumed the rails, of which he
had been so proud, and spoiled many a promising tree--with a desperate
endeavor, he set about comforting her.

"O, this is nothing," said he--"nothing at all! Consider what it would
have been had the cabin taken fire, and you and the children been in
danger."

"Which would have been the case," she added, "had not our quick-moving
town owner, Mr. Caswell, come to the rescue with his usual energy, at
the head of a force of men and teams, bringing with them hogsheads of
water, and pails, with which to throw it upon the fire. You have
reason to thank them; for they worked as I never saw men work
before."

"But how did the fire commence?" he asked.

"Why, you see," said she, "after you left, I said to the children,
'Father's gone to the Land Office to buy the land; and now we'll stir
around, and see how nice we can make everything look by the time he
gets back.' Well, you know how unsightly the chips looked around the
house, and which you had not had time to remove. So we went to work
raking them up into little heaps. While we were thus employed, we
heard the report of a gun in the bushes near by. The morning, you
recollect, was quite calm; but just as the gun was fired, a gust of
wind swept over the place, carrying with it some burning wadding that
alighted in a dry log some rods away. Before I could get there, the
inflammable wood was afire, and from that other sparks had been borne
on, and at once had kindled flames in a number of different places.
Seeing that it was impossible to arrest the progress of the
conflagration, I sent Helen to the nearest neighbor's to give the
alarm, and, as I have already said, by the help of those that came,
our cabin was barely saved, and the neighbors had to fight hard to
preserve their own dwellings."

Each day after that the missionary would walk about his blackened
domain, pondering the uncertainty of all sublunary things, about which
he had so often preached, his wife scrutinizing his disconsolate face
the while, and he repeating, with an emphasis that showed he was
saying it for his own benefit as much as hers,--

"O, it's nothing at all--nothing at all; and as for those few
rails,"--as he kicked over the burnt fragments with a melancholy
look,--"they're not of much account, for the piece over the river is
pretty well fenced, after all; luckily, the fires didn't touch them,
and we have them safe for another year."

One afternoon, a few days later, as Mr. Payson was in his attic study
absorbed, an unwonted darkness fell upon the page before him; then a
heavy peal of thunder succeeded. It was one long, continuous roll, for
an hour or more, without pause, and the rain poured down as he never
saw it in any shower east; it seemed as if the heavy clouds were
literally emptying their contents upon prairie and forest, while flash
followed flash of vivid lightning. Throughout the whole night it
rained, and the next day, and the next; and, were it not for the
ancient promise, one might have thought that a second flood was to
sweep the inhabitants of the world away. About midnight of the third
day of the terrible storm, the family at the missionary's cabin were
awakened by wild shoutings in the village below.

"What do you suppose is the matter?" asked Mrs. Payson.

"Nothing serious, I think," said her husband. "As the town site is
rolling and descends towards the river, it is probable that the high
water has come up into some of the yards and gardens, and perhaps has
invaded some of the settlers' pig-pens and hen-coops, and the
neighbors are working in the rain and darkness to save their live
stock."

The sun came out next morning like "a bride-groom from out his
chamber, rejoicing as a strong man to run his race," flooding the
fields with light, as the clouds had flooded them with water,
revealing the destruction which the tempest had caused. It appeared
that the river, a short distance up stream from the town, had become
obstructed by dead trees, and brush, and loosened soil, until a heavy
body of water had accumulated, when, the impediment suddenly giving
way, the water rushed with tremendous power, inundating a wide extent
of ground, and sweeping away everything movable in its path. Many
cabins were flooded, sleepers being awakened by the water dashing
against their beds, while articles of furniture were floating about in
the room. It was this that caused the outcries that Mr. Payson had
heard.

The Jones's cabin had been well chosen for safety on ordinary
occasions; but, on the night in question, Tom was awakened by
something cold touching his hand; for, in throwing it out of bed in
his sleep, it had been immersed in the water, which had entered the
room, and was rapidly rising. Shouting to his mother and the children,
he struck a light, and leaped into the water; and, taking Bub in his
arms, and directing the movements of the rest, he hurried them out of
the door, away from the river bank, as fast as they could go. How
providential it was that he should have, in his restlessness, dropped
his hand over the bedside! for scarcely had they ascended a swell of
ground beyond the field when the cabin went down with a crash, and
the fragments, whirling about and jarring together, disappeared from
view.

They were now poorer than ever; but, cold and wet, with the lightning
flashing about them, in the pouring rain, they clung together for
mutual protection, while they took their toilsome and difficult way
from the scene of danger.

There was an unoccupied shanty in the edge of the town farthest from
the river, and to that Tom led the terrified and shivering group. It
was three full hours before they reached it; and then they had nothing
but the bare walls and the bare floor, with the shelter over their
heads, for a resting-place, where, the next day, the missionary found
them as he went about assisting to succor the sufferers; and, at his
suggestion, from the scanty stores of the settlers about, their cabin
was fitted out with eatables and housekeeping articles.

During all this time Mr. Payson had been so occupied in benevolent
labor among those whose cabins had been flooded, that it had not
occurred to him that he had sustained any damage; but, after the
subsiding of the waters, as he took his way down his favorite path
through the grove, he saw that the waters had borne away every vestige
of fencing around his cherished ten-acre lot. The highest part of the
fence had been under water many feet on that calamitous night, and
with the loss of the rails had gone down another of the earthly props
on which he had leaned for his daily bread in the wilderness.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE INDIAN LODGE.


Spring on a north-western prairie. What a glorious scene! Suddenly,
you scarcely know when, the snow has disappeared, leaving the long,
dead grass lying in matted unsightliness, and you would think it was
dead forever; but soon, in little clusters of from three to seven, you
see dotting the landscape a purple flower, a tough, membranous, hairy
sheath protecting each floweret from the chilling winds, for it opens
at once to your gaze. Then, as the weather waxes genial, the blossoms
shoot up from their hirsute guardianship, and nod brightly in the
breeze. It is the "spring beauty,"--as the frontier folk call it,--the
first vegetation of the season, presenting the phenomenon of rich
blooming flowers, while yet the lifeless turf shows no signs of
vitality. But life is there; for at once, as if by magic, the whole
expanse is green with verdure, growing with marvellous rapidity,
decked with flowers.

                   "Garden without path or fence,
                   Rolling up its billowy blooms."

Then you rise some soft morning, and the air is vocal with the cooing
of myriad birds. If you are just from the east, you will think that
thousands of turtle doves are announcing that spring has come. They
seem close about you; but you cannot see them. They are not in the
groves near by; you follow the sounds through the waving prairie grass
for a long distance, and you find them not, and will be surprised when
your western friend tells you that these are the voices of the prairie
hens, miles away, holding their annual convention, the queer cuckooing
not being loving sounds, but notes of war--abortive attempts at
crowing, which the rival males set up as they prepare to do battle
with each other.

And now from the blue expanse overhead come down the varied cries of
the migratory birds returning from the south. Line upon line of wild
geese, in military order, follow their leader, while the trumpet
blasts of the sand-hill cranes--the ostrich of the American
prairie--ring out clear and shrill, and their long white bills glisten
in the sunlight from afar, like bristling bayonets of ivory.

Tom stood in front of the hotel, enjoying the spring sights and sounds
with unusual zest. The two winters now past had been eventful to him.
Mr. Payson, the missionary, who had taken a great interest in Tom,
had, the winter before, kept school in his own cabin; and Tom and his
sister Eliza had attended much of the time, their tuition being paid
by such assistance as Tom might be able to render Mr. Payson in his
outdoor work.

Eliza had grown to be a sedate and interesting young woman, and was
making good headway with her studies, when one day she gave notice
that she should not be able to attend school any longer; and to her
teacher's inquiries she returned only blushes in reply, and he could
get no further light until the next day, when an enterprising young
man from a "neighboring village," twenty miles distant, called to
invite Mr. Payson to join himself and "Miss Eliza" in marriage.

The last winter the missionary's family had occupied rooms at the
hotel. Mrs. Payson had been growingly unhappy from dread of the
Indians, and often said to her husband,--

"Our lot is just such a place as they would be likely to come to
first."

Mr. Payson did not share this fear; but, on account of her feelings,
the generous-hearted landlord offered them rooms for the winter rent
free.

The winter had gone by without any adverse occurrence. Tom had been
prospering in his studies under the missionary's direction, working
for his board in the family of one of the town owners, just opposite
the hotel; so it was but a step for him to the missionary's when he
wished to recite.

"Will you be able to hear my recitation this afternoon?" asked Tom, as
Mr. Payson came down the hotel steps.

"Yes," replied the missionary. "I am called away this morning, but I
think I shall get back in season."

That afternoon, as Tom sat in the missionary's front room, absorbed in
a book, the furious barking of a dog disturbed him. He glanced out of
the window, and saw, to his surprise, an Indian. The savage had
turned, facing the hotel, rifle in his hand, and, with flashing eyes,
was driving back a large mastiff that had attacked him. Tom was struck
with the singular intelligence and beauty of the young savage. He was
a shade lighter than most of his race, had large, dark, expressive
eyes, regular and finely-cut features, a symmetric form, and his
luxuriant black hair, which was of great length, was dressed with most
elaborate care, and the ornaments that he wore about his person, and
his blanket, were better than those usually worn by Indians.

From the Indian's manner, Tom concluded that he suspected the dog was
set upon him by some white person. The bearing of the red man was
lofty, collected, and defiant. In an instant Tom sprang down the
front stairs, and called the dog off. The Indian, glancing at the lad,
went stolidly on his way, up the main street, through the village,
till he was hidden from view by the trees on the missionary's land.

Mrs. Payson and her children stood at the window, watching the
retreating figure of the Indian with mingled fear and admiration.

"Isn't he handsome?" exclaimed the elder of the little girls.

"He certainly is very intelligent looking," remarked her mother; "a
noble specimen of the red man."

"Did you see that Indian?" inquired the landlady, a calm, dignified
woman, as she stepped into the room. "One of the boarders says there
is quite a company of them encamped on your husbands land. The have a
large wigwam, and seem to be making themselves as much at home as if
they owned the place."

The missionary's wife shuddered, and remarked,--

"It is just as I foreboded."

"But these are _friendly_," returned the landlady. "The chief has a
letter from the government agent, recommending him to the confidence
and charity of the settlers. It has been a long and hard winter, and
the agent says there has been much suffering among the Indians."

"Is that young Indian the chief?" asked Mrs. Payson.

"No; I wish he were. He is the finest-looking savage I ever saw. I
don't think I should be afraid to trust him. But the chief looks
frightfully; he is as cruel and treacherous as a snake, or I do not
read his face aright."

"Then you have seen him?" said the other, in surprise.

"Yes; I was riding through the woods with husband, and we met him. The
young Indian seems to belong to the company, and yet holds himself
somewhat aloof from the others, as if he feels conscious of being
superior to them, and finds it difficult to fellowship their low ways.
To-morrow a party of us are going to call on the Indians at their
wigwam, and I stepped in to invite you to go. There will be a good
many of us; so you needn't fear being tomahawked!" she added,
laughing.

The visit to the Indians the next day was full of interest to the
missionary's family, for, although they had seen numbers of the
half-civilized Indians of the Eastern States, they had never before
seen the red man in his native wilds, with habits and customs
unchanged from their primitive character. The wigwam was large and
well constructed, erected in a sheltered and romantic spot, convenient
at once to the village, the woods, and the river. Within were
squatted four or five of the company on the ground, playing a game of
chance, in which employment the Indian men spend most of their time,
when not hunting, fishing, or at war. There were no women with them,
and therefore the men had, besides the cooking, to do the drudgery
usually assigned to the squaws, such as gathering and bringing in the
wood, and dressing the skins of the wild animals.

The Indians did not lift their eyes as the whites entered through the
narrow opening which served as door, and ranged themselves around the
sides of the lodge as best they might. Nor did they answer any
questions, not appearing to understand a word of English, their faces
remaining as stolid under the remarks of the whites as if nothing had
been said; and taking it for granted that the Indians were as ignorant
of civilized speech as they appeared, some of the inquisitive
pale-faces indulged themselves in quite uncivilized speeches, for they
had a traditional contempt and hatred of their tawny brothers.

"You had better not express yourself quite so freely," said Mr.
Caswell, the landlord, aside to a settler; "these fellows understand
every word you say, and it's better to have the good will than the ill
will of a dog, as the old saying is."

Curious, however, to see what the effect would be, those who disliked
the Indians the most made them presents with the rest. Tobacco, skeins
of cotton, brass buttons, cakes, crackers, cents, sticks of candy,
bits of ribbon, were received by the Indians without a word or nod of
acknowledgment. No sign of consciousness of visitor or presents was
evinced, save that a grimy hand would deftly clutch the article tossed
within its reach, and convey it to the head, quickly and ingeniously
twisting it in the hair, the game proceeding the while, without a
pause. The young Indian played with his companions; and from his
beauty and princely bearing drew much attention and a large share of
the gifts to himself; yet even in receiving the presents he seemed
different from the other savages. His was the only face in the swarthy
group that betrayed "the workings of the soul;" and although he
fastened the trinkets in his raven locks, drops of sweat stood on his
brow, and it seemed as if it cost him a struggle to be treated as an
object of charity.

Tom, with the others, was much struck with the appearance of the young
Indian, and made a number of unsuccessful attempts to converse with
him. Finding that the "confusion of tongues," or some other barrier,
had made talking together impossible, in various ingenious ways he
tried to direct the Indian's attention to himself, but without avail;
game succeeded game in Indian silence, the talking and advancing
towards acquaintanceship remaining wholly on the side of the whites.

"How many belong to this company?" asked Mr. Payson of the landlord.

"There are nine of them: the rest are out hunting, I suppose," was the
reply.

"And do all these chaps manage to sleep in this little hut?" asked a
settler.

"A nice time they must have of it on the ground, especially when it
rains," added another, pointing up through the roof, which was open,
to let out the smoke.

"But," said the missionary, "everything is in remarkable order here.
Don't you see that each man has his place, and on the side of the
lodge a snug chance to stow away or hang up his personal effects. We
whites could scarcely arrange the little space with more fairness and
mathematical precision, so as to make the most of the room."

It was indeed so; and much did the callers marvel at the intelligent
system that prevailed.

"Some one has had a hand in the ordering of affairs here, who has more
intellect than we are accustomed to attribute to the red man;" and
the minister glanced at the young Indian, as if to say, "It must be
due to him."

But twilight was falling, and the villagers started on their way home.
Scarcely, however, had they passed the hedge of elders and the rows of
young oaks that hid the abode of the Indians from view, when from
within the wigwam there went up a startling whoop and yell, mingled
with derisive laughter.

Mrs. Payson stood still, pale with terror, as if expecting to see the
savages rush out to massacre them. But they kept within their tent,
their horrible whoopings and mockings continuing until the whites were
well away.

"I do not like the sound of those yells," said the missionary,
soberly.

"O, the Indians are only amusing themselves by trying to scare the
women and children," replied Mr. Caswell, merrily.

"There is more than that intended," returned the minister. "There was
the bitterest irony and hatred expressed in those tones. If the
authors of them dared, or it was in their plan to do so now, they
would spring upon us with the eagerness of so many beasts of prey."

The next day eight of the Indians walked into the village, one after
the other, as is the Indian way, and called at the hotel to beg. They
had found their tongues over night, and could manage, not only to
understand, when it was for their interest, what was said to them, but
in broken English make reply. They were a fine set of men,
physically--tall, broad-chested, erect; and, wrapped in their white
and red blankets, they made a formidable appearance. There was no
touch of fawning or crouching in their manner. They demanded the
articles given them, rather than begged. You would have thought them
lords of the soil, come to collect rent of tardy tenantry.

The young Indian, however, still preserved his individuality, and
various romantic conjectures were conjured up in imaginative heads
concerning him. Some went so far as to assert that he had no Indian
blood in him, and started the theory that he must have had white
parentage, and that he might have been stolen, when a child, from some
noble white family. But the more experienced of the pioneers set that
at rest by affirming that they could tell the pure, unmixed Indian,
and that he was one.

Tom lingered much about him.

"O," said he to the missionary, "if I could only talk with him, how I
would love to teach him how to read, and speak to him of the blessed
things in the Bible!"

"That is on my mind most of the time, Tom," replied the good man. "I
am often asking myself. Can I not, in some way, lead these benighted
souls to the Lamb of God? But how inaccessible they are! What an
impassable barrier between them and us! and, with the exception of the
youngest of them, how brutal and low! To see such splendidly-formed
men spend their time squatted on the earth, playing jack-straws, or
some equally silly game, from morning to night, is pitiful. And then
their yelling and laughter are more like wild beasts or demons than
human beings. These people seem to me the lowest, meanest, most
treacherous, and hardened of the human race. I do not wonder that it
is so difficult to civilize or Christianize them."

Weeks went by, and the Indians remained in their lodge, daily growing
bolder and more intrusive, till they had become obnoxious to the most
benevolent of the settlers. It had come to be not over pleasant to the
women of the neighborhood to look up from their domestic duties, and
see that a grim savage had stolen into the house, and, unasked, seated
himself in a chair, ready, as soon as he thought best, to nod, in a
dictatorial way, towards some coveted article, in a manner which
meant,--

"Hand that to me!"

Meanwhile Tom and the young Indian--who, whether that was his real
Indian name or not, was called _Long Hair_--had become quite
intimate. Nevertheless, not many words passed between them, for Long
Hair was more reticent, if possible, than the rest of his company. But
without word-signs they managed to understand each other. Long Hair,
indeed, appeared to read Tom's thoughts intuitively, and Mrs. Payson
was often made anxious for Tom, because he would be gone so long in
the woods with Long Hair. The latter had selected a tree for a canoe,
and Tom, with his sharp-edged axe, cut it down for him, and helped him
dig it out and shape it. A strange sympathy had grown up between them,
and one evening, as Tom was on his way to the prayer-meeting, chancing
to meet Long Hair, he invited the latter to accompany him, trying,
with great earnestness, to make him comprehend the object of the
gathering. Long Hair seemed to gain a dim perception of what his
friend meant, and, after much persuasion, entered with Tom the cabin
in which the meeting was to be held. The Indian's face gave evidence
of great excitement as the services progressed; the deep solemnity of
the prayers, and the devout strains of Christian song, took powerful
hold of the red man's feelings. Doubtless he understood little of the
scene in which, for the first time, he mingled; but a potent influence
went along with it, and so affected was he, that his hand sought
Tom's, and he held it in a strong, tender grasp till the meeting
closed, his frame trembling with emotion. And yet Tom could not
converse with him afterwards; and what the nature of the emotion was
that shook him so,--what thoughts were stirred, and with what result
for eternity in the bosom of that silent son of the prairie, who, for
the first time, had attended Christian worship,--no one knew. Tom
could not induce him to attend again, and yet he did not seem offended
at what he had heard; but when his white friend alluded to it, his eye
gleamed with a new light, and his face looked thoughtfully, doubtfully
serious.

Nearly every day Tom and Long Hair were together, the latter keeping
but little in the wigwam, and seldom going with the other Indians.
When they filed into town, and besieged the houses, trying the doors,
peeping into the windows, accosting the street-passers, Long Hair was
not with them; and when at evening they returned exultant from a
successful hunt, singing their strong-lunged song of triumph,--their
wild and scarcely human "Hi yar! hi yar!" growing nearer, till,
entering the village, they sang their way through to their lodge, Long
Hair was not of their number.

One day Tom, chancing to visit the wigwam, found Long Hair there,
shivering with a violent attack of ague. He was alone, and had been
for two days.

How bare and cheerless appeared the Indian's life to Tom's sympathetic
nature then! for an Indian, when sick, has few comforts. Solitary he
sits wrapped in his blanket, or lies on the ground, with no one to
nurse or care for him; no nice dishes to tempt his feeble appetite, no
hand to bathe his fevered brow, no medicines to assuage his pain or
drive disease away.

"Why, Long Hair," cried Tom, "why didn't you let me know that you were
sick?"

But Long Hair sat shaking in his blanket, and, as usual, heard, but
made no answer, only with his expressive eyes.

Tom brought in wood, and started the fire, and saying, "Mother'll know
just what to do for you, Long Hair; I'll go and tell her how you are,"
he ran to his mother's cabin, and, quickly making some nourishing
gruel, and putting up a store of simples that she used in fever and
ague, she returned with Tom to the lodge. What a treasure is a loving,
experienced woman in sickness, whether in a palace, a log house, or
beneath the rude shelter of an Indian's moving home--ever gentle,
exhaustless in resources, untiring in her ministrations! It seemed a
marvel to Tom how readily his mother knew just what to do for Long
Hair, intuitively adapting herself to his Indian peculiarities; and,
for the week that his illness lasted, she nursed him with great
tenderness, often remarking to Tom,--

"He is one of God's children, Tom; for the Bible says, 'God has made
of one blood all the nations of men to dwell upon the face of the
earth,' and Jesus died for the red man as much as for the white."

Through all this womanly care of him by Mrs. Jones, and brotherly
attention of Tom, the Indian, while shivering with the chill, or
burning and panting with the fever, made no acknowledgments of
kindness shown him, or uttered a word of complaint as he suffered,
and, when he recovered, returned in silence to his Indian
occupations.

"I wouldn't give one of the red skins a glass of water to save his
life!" exclaimed a settler who had lost by the depredations of the
Indians. "There isn't a particle of gratitude in one of 'em. Give any
of them all you have, and ten to one he'll steal upon you out of a
bush, and take your scalp."

"It is too true of most of the Indians, I admit," said Mrs. Jones,
"and perhaps Long Hair will prove ungrateful; but I only did as the
Bible directs, and I am contented."

But, some days after, as Long Hair strode into her cabin with a
freshly-killed deer on his shoulder, which he deposited at her feet,
saying, as he left,--for he tarried not to sit down,--"White squaw,
much good; Long Hair bring venison," Mrs. Jones wiped the tears from
her eyes, rejoicing more to find that there was gratitude even in an
Indian's heart, than at receiving his generous gift.

[Illustration: LONGHAIR AND HIS PRESENT. Page 186.]




CHAPTER XIV.

THE WAR-SONG.


Mrs. Payson sat sewing in her pleasant room at the hotel. Her thoughts
were far away from the checkered experiences of the frontier, for her
husband--having received by the last mail a new book from an eastern
friend--read while she plied her needle. Baby was in his crib in the
bed-room adjoining, and Fannie and Helen were whispering in a matronly
way in the corner, as with the help of mother's scissors they fitted
their dolls to new dresses. Had you looked in upon the group, you
would not realize that they constituted a pioneer missionary's family;
for the hotel building was tasteful and spacious, and if they lived
and dressed plainly, and often felt the pinchings of poverty, their
appearance betrayed no unhappiness. And then the volume had
transported the father and mother to other and brighter scenes than
those of the uncultured wilderness. The tone of the reader in its
subdued or impassioned modulations attested the interest he felt in
the volume, and the heightened color of the wife showed her sympathy
with the theme. What a magician is a book! It can cause the poor to
forget their poverty, and the wanderer in a distant land to become
oblivious of his exile.

"What was that?" exclaimed the missionary and his wife at once, as
they sprang to their feet in breathless suspense.

Again the horrible cry broke forth, seeming to come from the room
below.

At this moment the fair face of the landlady appeared, and she
said,--

"The Indians are below, and are going to sing for us. Won't you come
down and hear them?"

"Rather discordant music," answered the minister; "but I think we may
as well accept your invitation--don't you, wife?" and taking the
children with them, they descended to the dining-room. Ranged round
the long table were eight savages, and sitting back against the walls
a few boarders,--for most of the household were away. Some of the
Indians held tin pans, and on these, as an accompaniment, they beat
time with iron instruments, their heavy blows making a deafening din,
and their harsh, guttural notes, uttered in unison, made the
diabolical uproar. Mr. Payson's inspection of the performers in this
strange concert was anything but satisfactory to him. The manner of
the savages was impudent and brutal beyond anything he had yet seen in
them, and he fancied that their sneering and malignant grimaces and
serpent-like contortions of the body expressed evil and vengeful
passions that burned within. On the faces of the whites a startled,
anxious look struggled, with an effort to feel at ease, and fear
nothing.

"There is something wrong about these Indians," whispered the minister
to a man near him; "they are plotting mischief; their looks and tones
are full of ugliness; and I am convinced that if they intend no
trouble to-night, they know that some hidden danger threatens us. See
how that chief's eye glares. Observe the murderous leer of the one
beside him. Notice how they mock and insult us to our very faces. Now,
how awfully jubilant their tones, as if they had us at their mercy. Do
you suppose they are secretly armed?" and, rising, he went calmly from
Indian to Indian, lifting the blanket of each, to see if a rifle cut
short, or some other deadly weapon, was not concealed there. But none
was to be found; and at the close of their alarming exhibition, the
chief haughtily arose, bowed to the missionary, who was now seated
again, and passed out; each of his followers imitating him in the
salute as he glided from the room.

"The Indians have taken down their wigwam, and gone away," said Tom to
Mr. Payson, the next day.

"I am glad to hear it," replied the missionary; "they are a dangerous
set, and I have been quite anxious lest the settlers should get into a
quarrel with them. But what makes you look so depressed? Are any of
your folks sick?"

"No," replied Tom, striving to appear calm. "Father came home last
night--"

"Well, that was a pleasant surprise--was it not?" interrupted his kind
friend.

"Yes; but--but--he wants us to remove."

"Remove! Whereto?"

"Near Spirit Lake."

"I am sorry to hear that. I heard this morning that the Sioux are
quite insolent towards the settlers in that vicinity, and threaten an
outbreak. I must see your father, and dissuade him from his project;"
and the minister proceeded to the cabin occupied by the Joneses.

It was near Spirit Lake that Mr. Jones was wounded by the Indian.
This, however, did not deter him from going there again to hunt. Three
promising young settlements had sprung up there, side by side, for the
beauty, fertility, and cheapness of the land had attracted quite an
immigration that way. Mr. Jones had mingled much with the
settlers,--for an entirely _new_ country had special charms for
him,--and his knowledge of all matters most needful to the pioneer
made him a welcome acquaintance. He had become a great favorite with
the inhabitants. The Indians were numerous and bold, but entertained a
wholesome dread of the squatter's rifle and personal courage; and the
whites, although they did not anticipate serious trouble with the
savages, felt so much safer when he was with them, that they offered
him a comfortable cabin, and promised other advantages if he would
dwell among them. Among the Indians Mr. Jones went by the name of
_Long Rifle_, and they expressed great admiration of his marksmanship.
Occasions not unfrequently happened for him to show his superior
qualities in that line. For example, the squatter happened in one day
at a cabin, and found some half dozen Indians there, who had busied
themselves, in the absence of the men, in rummaging the house for
plunder, greatly to the terror of the women and children. As Mr. Jones
appeared, they seated themselves with Indian gravity, refusing to
answer a word, while their faces wore an angry and sullen look. Among
these were some famous for their skill with the rifle, and, knowing
their passion for target-shooting, he proposed at once a trial of
skill. This was eagerly accepted; but the squatter triumphed in the
contest, and the Indians went away much impressed with the result.

When Mr. Jones returned to his family, and mentioned his decision to
remove, the mother heard his account with a foreboding heart, but
made no objection, only saying,--

"We mustn't take Tom away from his studies."

To this the father assented, for he really felt grateful to the
missionary for the interest he took in his son, and proud of the
progress the lad was making in his books.

"Tom," said he, "has a good chance, and it isn't in me to discourage
him."

It was, however, more difficult to persuade Tom to remain behind, than
for his parents to give him up,--hard as it was for them. He had so
long been the staff of his mother, that it seemed like selfish
desertion for him to stay with the missionary, while she went farther
off on the frontier.

"It is your _duty_ to remain, Tom," urged the mother. "God has opened
the way for you to cultivate your mind, and fit yourself for
usefulness; and we shall not be so far away but that you can come to
us at any time, if we need you."

"And are you not afraid to go where there are so many Indians?" asked
Tom.

"Yes," she replied, "I am afraid; and yet I feel strengthened to go.
Your father will be useful there. He is fitted to take the lead in
case of trouble with the savages; the settlers look up to him, and
depend upon him, and I cannot find it in my heart to hold him back;
and if he goes, it is best for me to be with him. If you remain
behind, we shall have in you a friend to assist us if any trouble
should arise. You might be able to do more for us here than if shut up
with us by a common danger."

And so, with many a last farewell by the fond mother, Tom saw them
start for their new home.




CHAPTER XV.

THE MASSACRE AT SPIRIT LAKE.


Between the settlement in which the missionary lived and the one next
north-east was a wide prairie, succeeded by a stretch of primitive
forests, through which, down its abysmal, rocky bed, ran a foaming
river. The limestone bluffs that formed its banks abounded in holes
and caves--fitting homes for wild beasts. Here the cry of the panther
might be heard, and bears and wolves sought their food.

Through these gloomy solitudes Tom was making his way in the buggy,
which the missionary had provided; for Tom had been intrusted with the
errand of going to the village beyond for a trunk which had arrived
from the east for Mr. Payson. He was jogging along, listening to the
strange sounds of the forest; for it was near here, the last winter,
that a sight met his gaze that he could never forget. There had been a
succession of those _still_ snow-storms which so often come in the
night in Minnesota, and go off at day-dawn, leaving a perfectly even
coating of snow over everything. The sleighing was quite passable,
and the weather, that day, mild. Coming suddenly to an open space,
within a few feet of him, were two large gray wolves, eating a horse
not yet dead. The poor beast was still attached to his team, and
hopelessly struggled against his twofold fate; for he had fallen into
a 'sink-hole' that the treacherous snow had concealed, and his driver,
unable to extricate him, had abandoned him to his fate, or gone for
help. Brandishing his whip, Tom shouted at the wolves in hope of
frightening them off. They only raised their heads to glare
threateningly at him, their jaws dripping blood, then voraciously
resumed their gory repast, tearing great quivering masses of flesh
from the struggling beast, which they seemed to swallow without
chewing, with such a ravenous appetite did they eat.

Tom was a brave lad. But as he descended the side of the hill towards
the river, and the dense shadows made his way dim, although it was
high noon and a brilliant sun was flooding the prairies, he could not
shake off a feeling of dread that had grown upon him. Every now and
then he caught himself starting with nervous apprehension, and, to
break the spell, he began to whistle a merry tune, to keep up his
courage, as boys are wont to do. But he was thinking how dismally it
sounded, when, suddenly, in the distance rang out the clear notes of
a robin. Tom involuntarily reined in his horse at that; for the call
of that bird his Indian friend Long Hair used to imitate for a signal,
and had taught Tom how to do it.

"For the sake of Long Hair," said Tom, more cheerily, "I'll answer
you, old bird."

But scarcely had he done so, when, to his surprise, the bird
responded.

"Well," said Tom, "you think I'm your mate, I guess; and if you choose
to give me your company, I shall not object, it is so lonely here!"

So he answered the robin again.

Instantly the bushes parted, and Long Hair stepped into view. His eyes
were bloodshot, his blanket torn, and his whole appearance indicated
that something unusual had happened.

"Why, Long Hair!" exclaimed Tom, greatly startled; "what is the
matter?"

The Indian glanced warily about, then laid his ear to the ground,
listening intently, and arose quickly, saying,--

"Indian come. Much fight. Kill white man; kill white squaw; kill
pappoose."

"What of my father and mother?" inquired Tom, excitedly. "Have they
been murdered?"

"Long Hair save 'um little; father shoot one, two, tree, ten Injun.
Long Hair been up to Fort. Sojer no bleeve Long Hair; say he spy.
Long Hair come for Tom to get sojer. Injun see Long Hair; be here
pretty soon--one, two, tree, ten, twenty, _fifty_! Kill Long Hair,
kill Tom, take scalp. Tom go with Long Hair. He save him. Horse know
way home."

Tom saw, from Long Hair's manner, that it was no time for delay, and,
leaping from the wagon, with marvellous quickness the Indian turned
the horse's head about, facing home, and, striking him smartly, the
spirited animal rapidly retraced his way.

At their right rose a rocky ridge to a considerable height, springing
up which Long Hair motioned Tom to follow. The other side was quite
precipitous; but a narrow fissure in the rock afforded a scanty
footing, down which the Indian glided, Tom following him, although
dizzy with the height. Passing along for a short distance, they came
to a scrub oak, the roots of which had struck into the side of the
ledge. Climbing around it, a small opening appeared. Motioning Tom to
enter, Long Hair said,--

"If both stay, Injun kill both. Long Hair run swift like deer;" and he
darted up the ridge again with cat-like agility.

When Tom's eyes became accustomed to the darkness, he found himself in
a spacious, rocky room. It was one of those natural caves which seem
as if the work of art, rather than a freak of nature. The room was
almost a perfect square, and extending around its sides was a seat of
solid rock, while in a square hole, which looked as if it had been
excavated for the purpose, was a spring, the water of which was icy
cold, and of crystal clearness.

Tom seated himself to await the result of the strange events that had
so suddenly befallen him. Not a sound was to be heard in the forest;
and had he not known enough of the Indian acuteness in detecting the
approach of a concealed or distant foe, he would have doubted Long
Hair's representations of the impending peril. Indeed, as the moments
sped,--and they seemed long to him,--he had begun to consider the
propriety of venturing out to look about a little, when a slight
rustle in the ravine below arrested his attention. At any other time
he would not have noticed the sound, it was so like the passing of the
breeze. The scrawny roots of the tree at the entrance of the cave, and
the darkness within, protected him from observation; and, drawing
nearer the mouth of the cavern, he watched the bushes below with
strained eye. He had not long to wait when he saw an Indian creeping
cautiously along; then, a little farther off, another came into view,
and still another. They were Long Hair's pursuers; and from their
belts hung a number of scalps, which, from their bloody appearance,
showed that they had recently been taken; and the luxuriant tresses of
some of them indicated that they were from the heads of white women.
At the sight Tom's blood almost froze in his veins. But his heart gave
a sudden bound as he heard the sound of soft footfalls. From this he
judged that the Indians had got upon Long Hair's trail, and some of
them had gone round in front of the ridge, while the others followed
closely in his track. Tom felt that his hour had come, and a mortal
terror seized him. Then, thinking of his imperilled father and mother,
to whose succor Long Hair had bidden him go, he was astonished at the
fierce reaction which followed. He had no weapons; so, planting
himself behind the tree, he lay in wait, ready to spring upon the
first intruder, and hurl him into the depths below.

The dark figure of an Indian creeping stealthily along, like a horrid
serpent, he saw cautiously approaching the tree: a moment more, and
the death grapple would come, when an exclamation above made the
Indian turn his head. Long Hair's trail, returning from the cave, had
been struck by another Indian. At the same instant, Long Hair's
defiant war-whoop, challenging his pursuers to come on, was heard in
the distance. The answering yell of the savages from the ravine below
and the ridge above rang out as they dashed after. The Indian, unaware
of the presence of Tom, stepped to the tree to turn himself on the
face of the cliff, so that he stood with his brawny back close to Tom.
His waist also was hung with gory scalps. The sight maddened Tom to
frenzy. The savage let go the tree, and started to join the chase,
when Tom thrust his hands at once through the fissure, and sent him
headlong from the precipice. The body struck with a dull, heavy thud,
and all was still.

Tom could hear the sound of the pursuit as it died away, and knew that
there was now no immediate danger to him; and, stooping down, he took
a long draught from the spring, and bathed his fevered brow. Then,
climbing out of his hiding-place, he passed quickly upon the ridge,
and descended into the ravine below, where lay the mutilated form of
the red man.

"Who knows but he is the murderer of some of our family?" he said, as
he drew near. "No; none of our folks have such hair as that," he
added, after examining the scalps, one by one. Then, taking possession
of the rifle, powder-horn, and bullet-pouch, and thrusting the
Indian's scalping-knife into his belt, and throwing some limbs over
the body, that it might not so soon be discovered by his friends, Tom
hurried away in the direction of the fort, as Long Hair had
suggested. He lingered a moment, however, wishing that he could do
something to serve Long Hair, who, he well knew, had uttered that
challenging war-cry that saved his life on purpose to call the Indians
away from the cave.

But what was he? A mere boy against so many infuriated savages.
Besides, they were now far away, he knew not where. Moreover, Long
Hair had charged him to go for the soldiers to rescue his father and
mother, and, without further hesitation, he turned his steps towards
the fort. Tom was in good health, a quick walker, and, like his
father, accustomed to thread the woods and traverse the prairies.

Tom was agitated with strong and conflicting emotions as he pursued
his lonely way. His boy-nature had been terribly roused by the
exciting scenes through which he had just passed. He had experienced
the strange feeling which men feel, when, in battle, they are stirred
by danger and the sight of blood to deeds of blood. It was under this
feeling that he was led to precipitate the Indian from the bluff, and
to view his remains with so much composure. But now a faintness came
stealing over him. His young heart recoiled at the thought of what he
had done. This relenting, however, was repelled by the recollection
of Long Hair's heroism, and his father and mother's beleaguered
condition, if, indeed, the tomahawk ere this had not drank their life.
How many days had passed since Long Hair had seen them he knew not;
but it was easy to see from his friend's anxiety that his parents were
in an extremity of danger, and whether he could succeed in procuring
assistance for them in season seemed doubtful. It would take him, to
go afoot, two days to reach the fort; and he could not hope to get to
his father's settlement with the soldiers in less than a day more,
even if they were mounted. It was now about two o'clock, and he had
eaten nothing since early in the morning; but he thought not of food
as he hurried on. With the accuracy of the practised pioneer he struck
a bee-line for the fort. This took him some miles away from any
village; but towards night he reached a cabin standing alone.
Entering, he found the family just taking their evening meal. With
true western hospitality, the man of the house urged him to sit down
and partake with them, while his wife poured out a generous bowl of
strong, black coffee, which, as was the custom, was used without sugar
or milk; and she heaped his plate with fried pork, and hot, mealy
potatoes, while by the side of his plate she laid a generous slice of
brown bread.

Tom partook with a relish that did honor to the fare.

"Where are you from, and where are you bound, my lad?" asked the man,
who had refrained from questions until he saw that his guest was well
under way eating.

Tom's mouth and heart were full, and between them both he found it
difficult to reply. He was painfully hungry from his long fast and the
thrilling experiences of the day, and his brain was greatly excited.

"I am going," said he, answering the last question first, perhaps
because it was nearest at hand, "to the fort after help."

"After help!" cried the wife, stopping short in the act of
transferring a potato from the end of her fork to Tom's plate, holding
it aloft unconsciously. "Ain't any trouble down your way with the
Injuns--is there?"

"No, not exactly," said Tom.

And the good woman, relieved, remembered the potato, and deposited it
as she had designed, then was proceeding to place another slice of
pork beside it, just as Tom added,--

"But I saw lots of them this morning not more than twelve miles from
here, and they looked fierce enough in their war-paint, and with the
bloody scalps dangling from their bodies."

"Goodness gracious!" exclaimed the good lady; and, again forgetting
herself, she paused with the pork, letting the fat drip upon the snowy
cloth. "I told you, husband, they'd be down upon us yet, and we more'n
three miles from any neighbor."

And as Tom commenced his recital of the occurrences of the morning,
she sat down in her chair with the slice of meat still in its elevated
position, and the gravy dripping into her lap, while the husband
ceased eating, and listened with open-mouthed interest.

Tom eyed the pork longingly as he continued his narration, and, seeing
no prospect of getting it, abruptly said,--

"I hadn't tasted a bit of food till I came here since five o'clock
this morning, and I've got to Walk all night."

"Law me!" ejaculated his good-hearted hostess; "if I haven't forgot to
help ye, I was so scared 'bout the Injuns;" and she passed it, adding,
"Husband, you jist go down cellar, and bring up a pumpkin pie, and
some o' that gingerbread. The boy mustn't leave this huss till he's
had his fill;" and the tears came into her large blue eyes. "And are
you going with the sojers over among the Injuns where your father and
mother is?"

"Yes," answered Tom.

"Why, it seems to me that a stripling like you had best stay behind,
and keep out o' danger. One o' them Injuns wouldn't make nothin' o'
taking your scalp."

Tom's spirit rose at this, and he told them how he killed the Indian
in the morning.

"Well, I never!" said the good lady, in blank astonishment. "Why, I
don't s'pose my husband here would be any more dependence if them wild
critters should come beseeching our dwelling than a three-year-old."

At which the husband thrust his hand up into his wiry hair, till he
made it stand upon end all over his head, while he grew very red in
the face, and said, fiercely,--

"Let the varmints come on if they wants to. Guess I could stand it if
you could."

Tom saw that there was danger of a falling out between his fat,
overgrown hostess and her diminutive husband, and adroitly said,--

"We don't any one of us know what we could do until the time comes. I
was surprised myself at what I had done."

"Well," said the woman, restored to good humor, "there's a great deal
o' good sense in that remark. I know it from experience. For when I
had the toothache so that I couldn't sleep nights for a week, and
husband wanted to take me over to Groveville, to the doctor's, I felt
as weak as dish-water; but when I got there, I had out two jaw teeth
and a stump without wincin', as you may say, and the doctor said he'd
like me for a subject to pull on all the time. But I told him it would
take two to make a bargain on that, I reckoned;" and she laughed
heartily at the remembrance of her own wit.

But Tom had finished his meal, and rose to go, when his hostess
said,--

"You won't think o'travelling in the night--will yer?"

"Every moment is precious," replied Tom.

"Well, husband," said she, "if the boy feels, under the circumstances,
that he must go, it isn't in me to detain him. But it seems to me we
orter do as we'd be did by, and help him onto his way a piece. Now,
you jist go and harness the hoss into the waggin while I put up
something to stay his stomach like till he gets to the fort. You could
drive him there just as well as not, husband."

"Pretty long drive," observed the man, looking out of the little
window dubiously.

"Well, but," she persisted, "you see the child's got to go all the way
afoot, and it'll take so long that his folks'll be killed, murdered,
tomahawked, and scalped, afore he can git there." Then, waxing warm,
"an' if you an' I was in that perdicament, we'd want them as was going
to help us not to aggervate our feelin's by coming to our rescue when
it was too late."

"Yes, yes," returned the little man, unable to reply to his wife's
wordy reasoning.

"Now, if you're not afeard--"

"_Afeard!_" said he, bristling his hair, and reddening again. "Who's
afeard? I was only thinking, if the Injuns should come whilst I'm
gone, what would become of you, Barbery Jane."

"Well," said she, looking aghast, and sinking into her chair anew, "I
declare, if I hadn't forgot that!"

But she was a person who "made it a point" to carry her point in all
domestic arrangements and controversies with her lord; and partly on
this principle, and partly, we hope, from a worthier motive, she
rallied, and added,--

"But I'll risk it, if you will, James. An' I'm more in danger 'n you
are, bein' I'm so fleshy. You can hide most anywhere in the woods, and
they couldn't find ye any more 'n a needle in a haymow; an' I never
could stand it to think on't that we'd been sich cowards--"

"Cowards!" interrupted her husband, goaded by this; for on the matter
of size and courage he was specially sore--a wound which his spouse
took care to keep open. "Cowards!" and, bristling about, and striking
his feet together, he bustled out, and, with commendable energy, soon
had the horse in the buggy before the door. Tom sprang in, as the
kind-hearted woman passed him a bountiful supply of provisions,
saying, as she wiped her eyes with her apron,--

"I hope next time you come this way you'll be alive an' well; but I'm
dreadful afeard the Injuns'll git ye." The latter remark seemed to
have more effect upon her husband than Tom, for the flush disappeared
from his cheeks again.

The ponderous wife watched the wagon until it was out of sight, then,
with much pains, fastened the little window and the outer door, and,
going to her trunk, took from thence a copy of the Bible, and sat down
and read a chapter--a duty which she always performed on extra
occasions, and especially in times of danger. It mattered not to her
what chapter she read; and she now opened to the genealogical records
in First Chronicles. She was a poor reader at best; but she struggled
on with those names of foreign accent, feeling much safer with the
exercise, while her thoughts were far away, following Tom and her
husband. In truth, she had done a good deed, and one that had cost her
a real sacrifice, in sending away her husband with the horse to
accompany the lad; and the consciousness of this began to fill her
with happiness, calmed as she was by the feeling of security which
the use of the good Book imparted. Hers was a simple-hearted faith;
but who shall say that she was not accepted and blessed according to
the measure of her light?

Who would not choose to be such a one, with her defective knowledge
and her weak superstition,--as some would call it,--than the proud
sceptic, ever croaking, like some hideous night-bird, as he turns his
bleared eyes away from the beams of the Sun of Righteousness, "No God,
no Bible, no Saviour, no Heaven of blessedness, no Immortality,"
wandering through life without hope and God in the world, and, at
death, taking a frightful "leap in the dark"!




CHAPTER XVI.

A BELEAGUERED CABIN.


It was a misty morning when Tom and his companion approached the fort.
The air was damp with vapor, and the American flag, with its glorious
stars and stripes, drooped heavily. The fortress was on the very
outskirts of civilization, on an elevated point of land, commanding an
extensive prospect on every side. Richly diversified prairies, rarely
pressed by the white man's foot, gave one an impressive sense of
vastness and magnificence. As the sun arose, and the curtain of fog
rolled off, Tom gazed on the landscape, spell-bound; for, accustomed
as he was to prairie scenery, he had never seen any view that equalled
this.

"Not an Injun could come nigh this ere fort," said the little man that
held the reins; "everybody has to be seen, no matter how fur off they
be, specially when the officers gits their telescopes to their eyes.
Why, I suppose they can see hundreds o' miles with one of them big
glasses; any rate, I heard tell about their seeing clean up to the
stars, an' a good piece beyend."

They had now approached a gate, before which paced an armed sentry, in
answer to whose challenge, the little man, who grew consequential as
he neared the citadel, said,--

"This ere youngster, Mr. Sojer, wants to see the commander of this ere
institution on very perticler business, which admits of no delay."

The man with the gun sent a message into the fort without a word in
reply, until the messenger returned, when he said, laconically,--

"Pass in."

Tom had never before seen a fortress, and surveyed with eager interest
the rows of heavy guns, and the cannon-balls in conical shaped piles,
and the long, four-storied brick buildings extending around the
spacious square, from the centre of which rose the flagstaff. Grimly
as frowned the guns and warlike munitions, the neatness and order that
reigned had a pleasing effect on Tom's mind. And within those
many-roomed buildings, standing amid the solitudes of the wilderness,
in the families of the officers gayety and mirth often held carnival.
Already a gush of music, elicited by fair fingers from a richly-toned
piano, was borne through an open window into the court below. Then a
clear, sweet voice accompanied the instrument.

"Pooty as a bird, and a plaguy sight nicer," exclaimed the little man
as he frisked about, hitching his horse to an iron-ringed post.

Tom and his friend were shown into the dining-room of the commander
of the fort. The officer was an early riser, and breakfasted betimes.
The mahogany extension table was set with an elegant service.
General McElroy was a tall, slender man, with iron-gray hair and
weather-beaten face. His wife, a richly-dressed, stately lady, sat at
the head of the table, and a boy of seven, in Highland costume, was
at her side, while black Nancy flitted in and out with viands in her
hands.

"Well, my lad," said the general, sedately, "what do you want of me?"
motioning his callers to be seated.

Tom commenced to state the occasion of his calling, and the general's
stolid features lighted up with growing interest; and he said,--

"Wait a moment, my boy; I guess you've a message important enough, and
it will save time for you to relate it to two of us at once;" and
pulling a bell-rope, a soldier appeared, to whom he said,--

"Tell Captain Manly that I wish to see him."

In a moment the last-named personage came in. He was about forty, of
frank, open face, and soldierly bearing. Tom liked him at the first
glance.

"Captain," said the general, "I want you to hear this boy's story.
Commence again, my lad, and state the whole as briefly and connectedly
as you can."

When Tom finished his recital, "You are a brave little fellow," said
the general, "and in my opinion, if you were in the ranks, you would
be sure to be well spoken of;" then turning to the captain, he added,
"This is grave business, Manly, and something should be done for the
settlers whom this boy represents. I heard that an Indian called at
the fort, and tried to make us understand that there was an uprising;
and I suppose it was this Long Hair that the lad tells about, but I
did not attach much importance to what he said. And now, Manly, I want
you to take a detachment of men,--for I think I can depend on you to
do it up right. See that they are well mounted and provisioned, and
that their arms are in good order,--but you understand all about
that,--and go to the relief of the settlement that these villains have
beset."

Then turning to Tom, he asked,--

"What is your name, young man?"

"Thomas Jones," he replied.

"Well, Thomas, I conclude you will want to go with the men."

"Yes, sir."

"And do you know, the shortest route to the settlement in question?"

Tom answered affirmatively.

"Include a horse for the boy's use, captain, and see that he is well
provided for. He may be of use in piloting the way. At any rate he is
a noble-spirited fellow, and deserves consideration at our hands. How
many men will you need, captain?"

"I'd as lief have forty as more, if I can have my pick."

"Make such arrangements as will please you; and I hope to have a good
report when you come back. The rascally red-skins should be taught a
severe lesson for this outrage, or they may commit more."

Tom and his friend rose to withdraw with the under-officer, when the
general said,--

"But you have not told me how far you came this morning."

"We rode all night," returned Tom; "I took supper at this man's cabin,
and he brought me here in his wagon to save time."

"Bless me!" ejaculated the general, as he left the table; "that has
the true ring in it. Nancy, see that these folks have a sip of coffee,
and something to eat, and when you've broke your fast, my lad, come
out into the square. I guess the captain will be ready by that
time."

Tom felt some diffidence about accepting the invitation of the
general; but Mrs. McElroy was a true lady, and her winning smile, as
she filled his cup with the fragrant beverage from the silver urn, put
him at ease. She had many a woman's question to ask about his
adventures of yesterday morning, and seemed never to tire admiring his
heroic conduct. He was just explaining for the third time how he
pushed the savage from the cliff, when his voice was drowned by that
of a girl, who came tripping and singing through the long hall that
led into the dining-room. Hers were the same bird-like notes that came
through the open window. It was the general's only daughter, Alice,
who, as she burst into the apartment, stopped in surprise as she saw
strangers there.

"Just in time, Alice," said the mother, pleasantly, "to hear this
story."

The girl was scarcely in her teens, and her fair face, expressive of
good sense, gentleness, and intellectuality, was set off by a wealth
of auburn curls that fell in careless profusion over her shoulders.

Tom had never known anything of sentiment, or thought much of personal
looks, but he had a quick eye for grace and beauty, and, charmed at
the unexpected ingress of the little fairy, he forgot alike his food,
his manners, and his story, and gazed in stupid silence at the lovely
apparition. The mother comprehended the state of things, and, with a
look of gratified maternal pride, said to Tom,--

"But you mustn't forget your plate; you have had a long ride, you
know, and have another before you."

This recalled Tom to his senses, and in his straightforward, manly way
he finished the account of the affair.

"The captain's most ready," said black Nancy, glancing out of the
window, as Tom finished his repast.

"Farewell, my boy," said Mrs. McElroy. "I wish you success, and hope
no harm will come to you;" and Tom went out and mounted the horse that
had been provided for him, and shaking hands with the kind settler who
brought him there, he saw Mrs. McElroy and Alice waving their
handkerchiefs, as he and the men rode in military order out of the
square.

The horses were in good order, and the men in fine spirits, glad,
after their idle life within the fort, to be sent on active duty. The
day was almost cloudless, the air pure and bracing, and they coursed
the smooth prairies at a rapid rate. Yet to Tom's anxious heart the
moments seemed long; and when they stopped at noon for refreshment,
and to bait the horses, Tom could scarcely brook the delay. He was
really on his way with a brave band for the rescue. The thought of
this was joyful to him, yet he was afraid that they might arrive too
late; and as the soldiers lay upon the grass eating their rations,
Captain Manly, reading his feelings, said to him,--

"Be patient, my dear boy; be patient. The old saying, 'Prayer and
provender hinder no man's journey,' is as true in war as in peace."

He was a Christian soldier, and he added,--

"We must pray, Tom, that God will prosper us. By this bit of rest the
men and horses will be all the better for service when we catch up
with the savages; and if God shall so order it, we will save such of
the poor settlers as have escaped from massacre."

About the middle of the afternoon they drew near one of the
settlements that lay in their path. Scouts were sent ahead to see if
any Indians were lurking in the vicinity. They reported that none were
to be seen, but that the village had been totally destroyed. Putting
spurs to their horses, the eager soldiers were soon on the ground.

The air was still heavy with the smell of the burning, and as they
passed along they saw that every cabin had been consumed. It was a
scene of utter desolation. The horses' feet splashed in pools of
clotted blood, while ever and anon they came to the mutilated remains
of some victim of the massacre. In one place lay the form of a brawny
pioneer, his broken rifle still clutched by the muzzle, while the
ground around him was torn up by the mighty struggle he had made with
his assailants. Here young children had been murdered by being dashed
against a tree. To an oak near by a woman had been nailed while yet
alive. All the corpses were horribly mangled and disfigured,
indignities the most fiendish being heaped upon them. Their ears and
noses were cut off, sticks were thrust into their eyes, and their
mouths were filled with filth.

These awful sights wrought up the soldiers to frenzy. Tom's passions
rose also; but he was startled by the deadly paleness that sat upon
the countenances of the others, so expressive of intensified hate and
desire for revenge. But the scouts again appeared, and reported a
large force of Indians encamped before a log house a few miles farther
on; and Captain Manly decided to strike for a piece of woods to the
right of the savages. When the woods were reached, it was discovered
that all the dwellings on either side of the besieged cabin,
comprising three promising young villages, had been swept away.
Cautiously the little company pushed on to the scene of action. Before
the lone cabin were assembled hundreds of Indians, engaged in some
savage ceremony.

"They have taken a captive," whispered Captain Manly, "and have
brought him near the cabin to tantalize the inmates, hoping to induce
them to make a sortie for the rescue of the prisoner."

"It is Long Hair!" replied Tom, wild with excitement.

"Be quiet, be quiet, my boy," replied the captain; "we'll be in
_their_ long hair before they get his, if they don't look sharp."

Then dividing his force into four companies of ten men each, and
directing them to crawl carefully through the long grass to the points
he designated near the foe, he instructed each man to be sure of his
aim, and fire when the captain's division fired. The Indians had been
so successful in their attacks on the settlements thus far, and so
unmolested in their barbarities, that they were now completely off
their guard, which enabled the whites to get close to them
unobserved.

Tom's eyes were fastened upon Long Hair. The faithful Indian's
handsome face betrayed no fear, but it was evident that he had given
up all hopes of deliverance. With eagle eye he watched the ceremonies,
and, as he saw them approach their fatal termination, began to chant
his death-song. Captain Manly understood Indian customs, and telling
certain of his men to make sure of the savages nearest Long Hair, he
gave the signal, and the bullets of the ten unerring marksmen mowing
them down, firing from the other detachments following with deadly
effect.

The panic of the Indians was indescribable; for the firing from so
extended a line gave the impression of a much larger force than had
really attacked them. Their confusion was increased also at seeing
some soldiers issue from the woods, mounted; for the captain had given
orders, in case there was a panic, for a portion of the command
quietly and quickly to take to their horses and pursue the fugitives.
Thinking themselves attacked by superior numbers of both cavalry and
infantry, the Indians were at the mercy of the soldiers, who shot and
sabred them with small opposition.

As soon as Captain Manly saw the effect of the first volley, he said
to Tom,--

"I shall leave Long Hair in your charge."

For with delicate magnanimity he would have Tom be the deliverer of
the noble Indian who had perilled his life for Tom.

The lad needed no second hint, but sprang away, and severed the thongs
that bound his Indian friend to the death-stake.

"Ugh! Tom good friend; big soldier-boy," ejaculated the grateful
Indian.

"Are father and mother safe?" asked Tom.

"In cabin there," replied Long Hair.

Tom hurried forward towards the dwelling, but Long Hair seized him,
saying,--

"Maybe they think you Injun; shoot you!" for his keen eye had caught
sight of the muzzle of a gun pointing at them from out an aperture in
the building. "White chief come soon," he immediately added. "They no
fire at you; see, gun gone."

Scarcely had he uttered these words, when the outer door opened, and
Tom saw his mother standing there, for she had discerned him in the
deepening twilight, and recognized him as her son. Tom, with a bound,
hastened to her, and as she folded him in her arms, and tenderly
kissed him, he inquired,--

"But where is father?"

"Speak softly," she replied, as she led the way to a bed in a corner
of the inner building, on which lay Mr. Jones. "He is wounded," said
she, mournfully, "and is sleeping now. We cannot yet tell how it will
turn with him, but hope for the best."

"But where are the other men?" asked Tom, weeping, for only a few
women and children were in sight.

"They deserted us night before last. Our provisions had run low, and
the savages had retired to make us think they had left, and the men,
half crazed with sleepless nights and scanty food, were deluded by
the idea that they might get safely away, and perhaps bring us aid.
But, poor things, they were not themselves, and they had gone only a
few rods, when they were set upon by the savages, and brutally
slaughtered before our eyes. We used our guns on the Indians as well
as we could, but found it difficult to prevent them from scaling the
building."

"Did _you_ fire upon them?" asked Tom, wonderingly.

"Yes, my son," said she, gently; "and last night, knowing how feeble
our force must be, they were emboldened to attempt to burn the house.
The roof caught in several places, and your father went up and put out
the fire at the risk of his life. It was then that he was shot. He had
been our main defence from the first, for the Indians were more afraid
of his rifle than a dozen of others."

"But how did you get along after father was disabled?"

"We women loaded, watched, and fired by turns. I do not see how we
could have held out an hour longer. Help came just in time."

"But where are all the children," inquired Tom, forebodingly.

Mrs. Jones gave a low moan, as if her heart would break, but, with
wonderful self-command, suppressed all other manifestations of
emotion, and said, lovingly, laying her hand on his shoulder,--

"My son, we are a broken family; we shall never all meet again on
earth. Charlie disappeared at the first attack. I did not see him
killed; and you know what a quick, active boy he is, and he may have
escaped, although the chances were fearfully against him. Sarah was
overtaken by an Indian, and tomahawked while flying home from the
store."

"And Bub?" sobbed Tom.

"That was one of the crudest of the cruelties connected with the
outbreak. There was an Indian who made great professions of
friendship, visiting our cabin almost daily. You saw him, Tom, when
you visited us. We treated him very kindly, and made him many
presents. He seemed to have a particular liking to Bub, and Bub was
fond of him, and would always run to meet him when he saw him coming.
The day of the fatal attack, he made his appearance as usual, and Bub,
with an exclamation of joy, hastened to be the first to greet him,
when, as the child drew laughingly near, the treacherous savage raised
his rifle, and shot him through the head. This was the signal for the
assault. Sarah was standing at the time in the store door opposite,
and, seeing the murder, started for the house, her face terribly pale
with fright. So terrified was she that it seemed as if she flew
rather than ran; but the same savage swiftly pursued her, and, being
nearer the house than she, struck her down with his tomahawk. But
Robert has been left to us, and a brave, good boy has he been."

Tom was so absorbed that he had not noticed the quiet entrance of
Captain Manly and others of the command, who, seated or standing
around the room, listened intently to his mother's account of the
massacre. As she concluded, the captain said,--

"I had taken the precaution, madam, to bring the surgeon along with
me; and if you desire it, he will examine your husband's wounds, and
see what is best to be done for him."

At which the doctor stepped forward and proceeded to probe and dress
the wound.

"It is an ugly hurt," remarked the surgeon, "but by good care and
nursing he may rally."

"Just what are impossible," answered the captain, "in this place.
Would it do to remove him, doctor?"

"If a good litter was prepared," was the reply, "there would be less
risk in doing so than in leaving him in this wretched hole."

"Particularly," added the captain, "as the red-skins would be sure to
come back to finish their fiendish work. And I would propose, madam,
that, after my men have taken a little rest, we remove you and your
family at once to the fort, where you shall receive the best of
attention, and everything be done for your husband that skill and
medicine and needful comforts can do for his recovery."

Mrs. Jones glanced at the ghastly wound of her husband.

"I understand your feelings," said the captain, kindly; "but you have
shown that you are a brave woman, ever ready to do what is for the
best. Now, the Indians to-night were some three or four hundred
strong; and, panic-stricken as they were, some of them must have
discovered that I have but a handful of men. They will return in
larger force, thirsting for revenge. It is therefore indispensable
that we take Mr. Jones with us. It is all we can do under the
circumstances."

Mrs. Jones saw the propriety of this, and gratefully assented to the
captain's plan, and at the hour appointed--all the preparations having
been efficiently made--the wounded man was carefully placed upon the
nicely-constructed litter, the women and children taken upon the
soldiers' horses, and the little cavalcade moved noiselessly out on
the star-lighted prairie.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE MYSTERIOUS FIRE.


Few words were spoken, as the handful of brave men, with the rescued
women and children, and the suffering squatter moved on. Experienced
scouts were thrown out on either hand, to give notice of danger, for
at any moment the wily foe might spring upon them.

"Where can Long Hair be?" whispered Tom to his mother.

"I cannot imagine," she answered; "he left the cabin as I was telling
you about the loss of the children through the treachery of Yellow
Bank. His eyes glared while I was speaking, and there was a look on
his face that I could not interpret. Do you suppose he is trusty?"

"Trusty!" echoed Tom; "why, mother, he perilled his life for us."

"Yes, I know it, child; he is unlike any Indian I ever saw. But why
did he leave so mysteriously?"

"I don't know," replied Tom. "Captain Manly tried to find him; he
wished to present him to General McElroy. He said he did not doubt
that government would reward Long Hair for his services."

"Well," sighed his mother, shuddering as she spoke, "how different
these Indians are from us! They come and go so noiselessly, and talk
so little! But what is that?" she exclaimed, glancing back.

"What?" inquired Tom.

"Why, that light,"--pointing in the direction from which they came.
And Tom saw against the dark woods, for a background, thick flying
sparks from the cabin chimney made themselves visible for miles across
the prairie.

A scout now rode up, to call the attention of the captain to the same
appearance.

"I cannot comprehend it!" ejaculated that officer, putting his glass
to his eyes. "It is clear that the cabin is not on fire. It seems to
be occupied." And, riding up to Mrs. Jones, he said, "Madam, can you
tell me if there was any fuel in the fireplace when we left?"

"There was not," was the decided reply.

"But there is a large fire burning on the hearth now; how do you
account for that? It's a trick of the savages," he muttered, as he put
spurs to his steed; "and yet," he added, "it is not like the Indians
to go into a house and make a fire. If they had discovered our
retreat, they would be too cunning thus to let us know that they had
found it out; we should see them prowling around as stealthily as so
many panthers. Somebody's alive and stirring there; who can it be?"

The singular incident served to heighten the anxiety of all, and
stimulate the soldiers to make as good progress as they could without
too greatly distressing the wounded man. Several times, in the dim
light, the groaning and pallor of her husband led Mrs. Jones to fear
he was dying, and, with Tom and Robert, she watched every change in
his appearance, tenderly ministering to him. Fresh relays of men took
the places of those who bore him, taking their turn at the litter with
alacrity, for Tom's dutiful and heroic conduct, and the mother's
loving gentleness and patient endurance, and the squatter's stubborn
defence of the lone cabin against such odds, had won the hearts of the
soldiers, and they had resolved to see the family safe within the
walls of the fortress, or, if attacked on the prairie, to defend them
to the death.

"How did it happen," asked Captain Manly, in a low voice, of the
mother, "that your cabin was enclosed with those walls of heavy logs.
Were you expecting an attack?"

"Long Hair gave us warning," she replied; "and husband persuaded the
settlers to cut down trees and build the walls."

"And your husband directed the defence?"

"Yes," said she, "and he made a sortie, and rescued a number of
neighbors, who would otherwise have been murdered,--the very persons
who afterwards deserted in the night, leaving, in their haste, the
outer door wide open. We should all have been sacrificed before
morning, had we not been startled at seeing Long Hair standing in the
cabin. How he got in undiscovered through so many enemies, and
notified us of our danger in so timely a manner, we could not
conjecture. Husband secured the door again, and Long Hair vanished as
he came, saying, 'Long Hair go quick, get sojer, come right back
bimeby, quick!' that was, I suppose, when he came to the fort, as Tom
told us about, and not succeeding in his errand, hurried to find Tom,
to intercede with you for us."

"You have had a hard time of it," said the captain, "and your husband
stood a siege before which a well-manned fort might have fallen. I
only hope that the brave fellow'll get well, and enjoy the fruits of
his noble conduct. If I had a few hundred men like him, I could sweep
the red-skins from the soil."

But the jarring, and the motion, and the pain were proving too much
for the wounded pioneer, and delirium setting in, he began to rave,
speaking, however, slowly and distinctly, and without a tinge of the
squatter dialect, but in the purer English of his early days.

"There!" he exclaimed, pointing his finger, "you've come again. I knew
you would not let me rest."

"He's thinking of the Indians," remarked the captain, sorrowfully;
"the confounded red-skins!"

"I told you he stole it all. Will you harass me into my grave? A set
of vampires, sucking the life-blood of an honest man!"

"Now he wanders," said the captain; and, sending for the surgeon, the
latter opened his medicine case, and, lighting a match to read the
labels on his vials, administered an opiate, and the sufferer sank
into a troubled stupor.

"Ah!" whispered the mother to Tom, "it is not the savages that disturb
his mind so; it's the old agony of a wounded spirit."

About noon, the next day, they came in sight of the fort. How welcome
the frowning walls to the weary women and children! How sublime seemed
the national flag, floating proudly on the breeze, symbol of a united
sovereignty of states, powerful to protect its citizens on the ocean
and the land, in the teeming city, and in the wilds of the
wilderness!

General McElroy received the settlers in the kindest manner, causing
them to feel at once that they were among friends. Airy, quiet
apartments were assigned to the wounded man and his household, and
the ladies of the garrison vied with each other in their attentions to
him and his stricken family. Often would Mrs. McElroy come in and sit
by Mr. Jones, that his wife might get some rest. With her and her
husband Tom had become a great favorite, and they entertained a high
respect for the mother.

The squatter's life in the open air, roaming the prairies, tended to
build up for him a healthy physical organization, favorable to the
healing of the wound; and as this progressed, the doctor marvelled
that he did not get stronger. He was strangely liable to delirious
attacks, and opiates gradually lost their influence over him.

One day the surgeon entered as his patient, wildly raving, was
exclaiming, with great vehemence,--

"I tell you, again, that I have nothing to pay with, and you will give
me no chance to earn. O, what a load to carry! Debt! debt! debt! Shall
I never find rest?" Then, in a moment more, his thoughts relapsing to
another subject, he murmured, "What did the preacher say?
'Come--unto--me--and I will--give you rest;' yes, that is what I want.
O, if only I could come!"

The surgeon watched him through the delirium, and said,--

"Madam, it is not the bullet of the savage that's killing your
husband, but some more deadly sore. He needs medicine for the mind,
rather than the body; and when he is himself, you had better call in
the chaplain to converse with him."

An hour later, when Mr. Jones had an easy interval, she gently
said,--

"Husband, you are very sick. Don't you think it might do you good to
have a little talk with the minister?"

"Minister!" he feebly answered; "what minister?"

"The minister that belongs to the fort."

"I don't know him," replied the sick man, suspiciously. "But there is
_one_ minister that I do know," he added, after a moment's pause.

"Who?" she inquired.

"Why, _him_!" he answered, impatiently, as if he thought she ought to
understand.

"You mean the missionary," she returned.

"Yes; if I could talk with him, I would like to."

The wife mentioned his remarks to the surgeon, and General McElroy
sent for the missionary.

It was evening, of a lowering, rainy day, when the messenger returned
with Mr. Payson. It had been drizzling and dripping all day, but
towards night the clouds grew black and wild, and a furious wind
dashed the big rain-drops violently against the window. The air was
raw, and seemed to pierce to the bones. The old fort buildings were
delightful in fair weather, but now were damp and chilly. Mrs. Jones
feared for the effect of the storm on her husband, whose frame, since
his wound, had been extremely sensitive to atmospheric changes; and
dreading that, if he was disturbed, he would relapse into delirium,
she concluded not to invite the missionary in to see him until
morning. She had disposed everything as comfortably as possible about
the bed, and had a nourishing broth and his medicines handy, when Mrs.
McElroy entered, and said,--

"You look worn out. Go and take a nap now, and if you are needed I
will call you. You know the missionary is here, and will wish to be
with him in the morning; and it is desirable that you should feel as
well as you can, to encourage your husband."

Mrs. Jones, thus charged, retired to an adjoining room, thinking to
rest herself for a short time, and then return. She felt that a great
event was impending, and thought it impossible for her to close her
eyes; but so utterly exhausted was she, that she immediately fell into
a sound sleep, from which she was awakened at midnight by Mrs.
McElroy, who said,--

"A great change has come over your husband. I think he is going to get
well. He wants to see you and the boys."

Hurrying to her husband's side, she found him sitting up in bed as
composedly as if no trouble had ever disturbed the serenity of his
mind, looking much as he did in their bridal hour. He had called for a
bowl of water and a towel, and was calmly washing himself. Bestowing
on her a loving look as she entered, he asked,--

"Mary, dear, has the missionary come?"

"Yes," she replied.

"Can I see him now?"

Mrs. McElroy took out her watch, and said, pleasantly,--

"Are you particular about seeing him now? I suppose you are not aware
how late it is."

"Yes," he answered, "it is twelve o'clock;" and his eye shone with a
strange intelligence. "I should have sent for him a year ago, had not
my heart been so proud and bitter. But I know _him_. He'll come now,
if it is late."

There was something unearthly in his manner, and Mrs. McElroy said,
rising,--

"It shall be as you request."

As Mr. Payson entered, the sick man extended his hand, saying,--

"I'm almost through, my friend. I've had some sore trials in
life,--not so much on my own account as because of those who were too
dear to me. We were cruelly wronged, and I have not been quite right
here,"--placing his hand upon his forehead,--"and what has made it
worse, I have been all wrong here,"--laying his hand upon his heart.
"I have doubted everybody, and distrusted my God. I have been hard and
scornful, and hated my fellows; but it is different with me now. I
have heard that voice speaking to me, that you told us of in the
little cabin. He has said unto me, even me, 'Come,' and he has given
me 'rest.' I have had a long, long struggle, but the conflict is over.
Ah, He is so different from human creditors! I have been a poor
debtor, chased, hunted, oppressed, goaded almost to insanity, and none
took pity on me, because I owed them a few paltry dollars, which I had
the heart to pay, but, through the robberies of another, and their
oppressions, could not. But what a debt I owed my Savior! Yet, without
a word of reproach, he has forgiven me all!"

This was spoken with a wondrous energy and clearness of voice; but a
deathly paleness began to overspread his face; partial delirium
supervened, not raging, as before, but his features lighted up the
while with a smile of heavenly beauty, and repeating again, his voice
sinking to a whisper,--

"What did the preacher say? 'Come unto me, and I will give you rest.'
Rest! Rest! It is mine." His spirit was gone.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE BOY IN THE TREE.


Charlie was a boy who naturally loved adventure. He was excitable, and
yet had a reserved power, which, in great emergencies, made him cool
and brave. He was fertile in expedients, and, when aroused,
experienced a rollicking enjoyment in danger. In the little settlement
he came across an old copy of Robinson Crusoe, and, charmed with its
romantic descriptions, conceived the idea of becoming another Crusoe.
But there was a serious obstacle in his way. He could not convert a
prairie into an ocean, and get shipwrecked. Yet if he lacked salt
water, there was many a man Friday at hand,--for he mentally promoted
every friendly Indian to that office,--and there were plenty of
cannibals in the shape of disaffected Indians who were already
threatening the settlements with depredation and carnage. Now,
Charlie, to enjoy his book under congenial circumstances, and where he
would not be interrupted by his mother saying, "Charlie, bring some
wood," and "Charlie, get some water," and the various et-ceteras of
domestic duty to which boys of his age and active habits are liable,
looked about for some safe retreat, and chanced to find, one day, in
the woods near at hand, a large, hollow tree. Many a time had he
passed it, and not discovered the welcome fact. The entrance was
effectually concealed by a tangled clump of bushes. Had they taken it
specially in hand to grow in such a way as to hide the hole in the
tree, they could not have done it more thoroughly; and nobody but a
prying young Crusoe of Charlie's qualifications would have spied out
the entrance. Having discovered it, he would creep slyly in, and, by
means of the light let in through a hole higher up in the trunk, would
pore over the haps and mishaps of the Juan Fernandez hero, and imitate
his achievements as well as he could.

It got to be a great mystery what became of Charlie through the long
hours of the day. He could hear and see much of what passed around
him, and, with imperturbable gravity, would sit in his sly retreat,
making no answer, while his mother would come to the cabin door, and
call, in silvery treble,--

"Charlie! Charlie! Where are you, Charlie?"

And then, in turn, the father would make his appearance, and shout, in
masculine bass,--

"Charlie, Charlie, your mother wants yer. Why don't you come?"

After a while Sarah would be despatched to search for him, and her
girlish voice would repeat the parents' calls as she looked everywhere
in vain.

Then, when he returned to the house, to the accustomed inquiry, "Why,
where have you been? We've been calling you, and hunting everywhere
for you," he would reply, with the utmost nonchalance, "O, only out
here;" at which Sarah would retort, impatiently, "I know better than
that; for I hunted all round for you, and you wasn't anywhere to be
seen;" and Charlie respond, with compassionate condescension, "Pooh!
girls are great at hunting!"

Now, it was very wrong in Charlie to be so dumb when his parents
wanted him, and to cause them so much concern by his unexplained
absence; but he justified it to his own conscience on the ground that
it was in keeping with his character as second Crusoe. Robinson
Crusoe, in his estimation, was the greatest and most glorious man that
ever lived. Charlie had taken him for his model in life; and it would
derogate from the dignity of his position, while enacting the man
Crusoe,--"monarch of all he surveyed,"--to obey as the child Charlie.
He was willing, when in the house, to do what was expected of him, as
a boy under subjection; but when he was in his Crusoe cave, _alias_
the hollow tree, he was altogether another person; and he reasoned, in
order to have things in harmony, he must act accordingly.

Charlie, by some means, had come into possession of a horse pistol,
considerably out of order, it is true; but it served to fill the place
of one of the two pistols Robinson Crusoe found on board the Spanish
ship. He was in daily expectation of finding another; but needing
ammunition to store up against a coming fray with the cannibals on the
shore, he helped himself frequently to the contents of his father's
powder-horn and bullet-pouch.

"What under the canopy makes my powder go so fast?" his father often
exclaimed, as he replenished the mysteriously-wasting stock. The lad
also begged ammunition of the free-hearted settlers, and by these
means he laid up a surprisingly large amount of warlike munitions,
kept securely in an old skin bag. He had also dried venison stowed
away, and a good store of nuts, with pop-corn for parching, and
potatoes for roasting--all against some coming time of need.

Now, it chanced that Charlie's tree-cave turned to good account, as it
saved his curly scalp; for the afternoon of the Indian outbreak,--with
one eye on the Crusoe history, and the other watching to see if any
cannibals landed on the shore, taking an occasional sip from an old
coffee-pot filled with spring water, which he called goat's milk,--the
whole frightful scene of the massacre passed before him. He saw dear
little Bub run to meet Yellow Bank, and he also saw what his mother
did not in the panic, that, just as the treacherous savage fired, the
little fellow tripped and fell, unharmed by the bullet. He saw, at
that instant, his sister Sarah start from the store for the cabin, and
that the fiendish savage did not notice Bub's escape, in his eagerness
to intercept the girl; so that Bub, terrified by the report of the
gun, and at seeing his sister struck down by Yellow Bank, dragged
himself off in the direction of Charlie's tree, not seeming to know
but that he was going towards the cabin.

He saw the door of the cabin closed, and that preparations were made
to keep out the savages, and that the whole attention of the Indians
was turned on assaulting the house. So, cautiously creeping out, and
placing one hand firmly over Bub's mouth to prevent him from making a
sound, he drew him into the tree. He was fully aware that he did this
at the risk of his own life; for if the child made an outcry, their
hiding-place would be discovered, and they would both be sacrificed.
But he had too loving and noble a nature to save his own life by
leaving his darling pet brother exposed.

Charlie found it a difficult task to control himself sufficiently in
the scenes that were passing before him to keep guard over Bub each
instant, as he must, to prevent him from revealing their place of
refuge. The little fellow had received a terrible fright, and at first
struggled with singular strength to free himself from Charlie's grasp,
and Charlie's arms ached from the constant strain in holding him; his
efforts, however, were rewarded at last by Bub's beginning to
comprehend the case.

"It's the wicked Indians," whispered Charlie, "and they'll kill us if
we make any noise."

Three days and nights came and went. How thankful Charlie was for the
provisions and water which he had unwittingly provided for this
fearful hour! He had the good sense, however, to be careful of the
water; for he knew not how long he must stay there; and he taught Bub
to eat very slowly, as he had heard his father say that the hunters
did so on the plains to prevent thirst. It was a terrible ordeal for a
boy of his tender years to witness the horrid sights transpiring
around him; and then, when the neighboring cabins were fired, he was
filled with fear, lest the cinders would set the tree ablaze.

Charlie hoped, through all this long watching, for an opportunity to
take refuge with his father and mother in the cabin; but the savages
lay encamped around him, and several times an Indian crept upon his
hands and knees, and fired from behind the tree at the inmates of the
cabin.

Three days and nights--how long they were to the children in the tree!
And yet there was nothing to indicate that they might not remain there
as much longer, provided the defence of the cabin continued as
persistently as it had done. There was still a good supply of food,
although the potatoes had to be eaten raw. But the water grew
nauseating, and if some more could not be obtained, what would they
do? Bub began to be tormented with thirst, and once attempted to cry
for water. He had borne up like a hero, controlled by his fears,
sometimes seeming to forget his own wants and perils in his baby
concern for his parents.

"Will the wicked Indians kill father and mother?" he once asked, his
blue eyes wide with horror, and voice too loud for prudence, just as a
savage was creeping up to take aim from behind the tree, so that
Charlie had to guard him with ceaseless vigilance. But thirst--how
could he expect that a little boy, like Bub, could long endure its
torments without making his agony known?

"I want some water," hoarsely whispered Bub; "I dry."

"Well, don't make any noise, and Charlie'll get you some."

So, waiting till after nightfall, Charlie put his head cautiously out
of the hole, and peered around. The spring was not far off; but
Charlie knew that the savages would be likely to guard that, and he
did not venture to draw his whole body from the aperture save with the
utmost caution, and very slowly. Satisfying himself that the Indians
were not noticing the tree, he drew himself completely out, and then,
putting his head in again, whispered,--

"Now, Bub, don't you move nor stir, while I go for the water. I'll be
back in a minute."

The heroic boy might have been taken in the darkness for an overgrown
caterpillar, he crawled so softly towards the spring. He knew that if
he broke a stick or twig, or inadvertently hit his coffee-pot against
an obstacle, the quick ear of the Indian would be sure to detect it,
and yet he was surprised at his own coolness and mastery of himself;
and he accomplished the feat, returning with the black old pot filled
to the brim.

He had got within a few feet of the tree, when, in range of the
opening, he saw a figure apparently watching him. Charlie thought his
hour had come; that it was a savage ready with his scalping-knife,
and had given up all for lost, when the dark form moved from out the
shadow towards him, and to his consternation he saw that it was Bub,
who trudged forward, saying in a loud whisper,--

"Has oo dot any water?"

Charlie, to save further noise, chose the bold alternative of letting
him drink on the spot; and retaining his prostrate condition, quickly
put the pot to Bub's lips, and the child swallowed great draughts with
satisfied gutturals that seemed to Charlie's apprehensive ear like the
reports of pocket pistols. He let him drink his fill, however, then,
pulling him down by his chubby legs, thrust him swiftly, but softly,
through the aperture, following as fast as he could, and keeping
perfectly still for a full hour before he dared venture forth again
for the coffee-pot, which he was obliged to leave behind.

The vigilance of their father in the defence of the cabin not only
kept the children in the tree longer than Charlie bargained for when
he turned in, on that memorable afternoon, to play Crusoe, but also
put their lives in jeopardy from their father's bullets. For, as we
have said before, the tree being a large one, and conveniently near
the cabin, the savages would creep up behind it to shoot from, which
would be sure to bring a dangerous response; and Charlie was obliged
to know more than once that the tree was perforated by balls from his
father's rifle. At such times the youngsters kept as close to the
ground as possible.

When the Indians set fire to the roof of the cabin, Charlie was almost
wild with excitement, fearing that his parents would now be burned to
death. Nor was his anxiety lessened when he saw his father ascend the
roof to extinguish the flames, thus exposing himself to the deadly aim
of the foe.

Captain Manly's attack, however, he did not understand; for the
soldiers did not pass near the tree, and the confusion and
clamor, the horrid yells that rent the air, and the tramp of the
contending parties in the dim twilight, seemed like the chaos of
a whirlwind,--the fight was so sudden and so soon over,--and
he dared not leave the tree after the battle, not knowing what it
all meant. He had a bewildered idea that there had been an
attack on the Indians by a party of whites, but which had been
victorious he could not tell. So he watched on, trying to
determine this point, until late in the night, when he saw a dark
body moving cautiously from the cabin.

"The Indians have taken the cabin," he concluded, "and now they'll
burn our house as they did the others."

And yet it puzzled him to see how closely together the savages kept,
instead of being scattered about in all directions, as they were
before. He could see them moving quietly away, and thought some of
them were mounted on their ponies. After they were well out of sight,
resting Bub's head against the skin powder-bag,--for the little
fellow, overcome by weariness, had fallen asleep,--he crawled from his
hiding-place and reconnoitred. Suddenly he stumbled over a dead
Indian, lying with his rifle beside him; and soon he came across
another. But all was still in the cabin.

"There has been a battle," said Charlie to himself, exultantly, "and
the Indians are driven away;" and he entered the house.

All was dark and quiet; so, feeling his way to the chimney, he raked
open the ashes, and found a few sparks. Going out, he gathered twigs
and limbs, and, heaping them on the hearth, blew them into a blaze;
then running to the tree, he awakened Bub, and hurried him to the
cabin, and returned for his Crusoe provisions and ammunition.

"Where's father and mother?" asked Bub, looking round in dismay.

"I think," said Charlie, soothingly, with a profound air, "that the
settlers have got together and driven off the Indians, and taken our
folks where they'll be safe; and now, Bub, we'll live here like
Robinson Crusoe on the island, and you shall be my Friday till our
folks come back; for, you see, they'll find out that we ain't with
them, and they'll come and take us away."

"Can't we go where our folks is now?" inquired Bub, beginning to cry.

"It's so dark we can't find them," said Charlie.

"Won't the Indians come and hurt us?"

Charlie started at the thought.

"I don't know," he replied, shaking his head doubtfully; "'twould be
just like them. But I'll tell you what I'll do. There's a good many
Indians been killed around the house, and I'll just go out and get all
the rifles I can, and then let them try it if they want to. Why,
Robinson Crusoe drove off twenty-nine canoes full, and I bet he didn't
have so many guns as I'll have."

And hastening out, he kept finding and bringing them in until he had a
dozen.

"Now," said he, "I'll bring in lots of wood, and we'll keep the fire
crackling;" and he stirred the burning limbs to make the sparks fly;
"and if the Indians return, they'll think there's a big houseful of
men in here. Besides," he added, "if our folks see the sparks from the
chimney, they'll know you and I are here, and return for us. And on
the whole, I guess I'd rather go with them, than to fight the
cannibals alone; for if I should happen to be killed, I suppose they'd
have to eat me, and I'd rather not be eaten."

Charlie brought from the enclosure a fine pile of wood and a pail of
water, then went out to see that the outer door was secured, and
closed the shutter in the room. He then proceeded to examine the
rifles,--for he was well versed in fire-arms, like western boys
generally,--and carefully cleaned and loaded them.

"Now," said he, "Crusoe had his seven guns mounted, and I'll mount my
twelve."

Fortunately for his scheme, the places had been already prepared.
After this was done, he went down into the cellar to see if there was
anything to eat, and finding some food, he returned, and hanging the
tea-kettle over the fire, he poured some boiling water upon the
tea-grounds in the tea-pot, then set the table for himself and Bub,
and assigning Bub one chair, and getting another for himself, said,--

"We might as well live like folks, as long as we are out of the
tree."

Then, having finished their repast, he said,--

"I feel tired, it's so long since I've had a good sleep; so I guess
we'd better go to bed." And lying down upon the bed in the corner,
with an arm lovingly clasping little Bub, they sank into the sweet
sleep of childhood.




CHAPTER XIX.

BUB'S BROADSIDE.


It was nine o'clock next morning when Charlie awoke, much refreshed.
Some moments elapsed before he could recollect where he was, and how
he came there. Then, hastening, first to the port-holes, through which
his guns were pointed, he scanned the field on all sides, to see if
any enemy was in view. The result being satisfactory, he commenced
preparations for breakfast, for Bub was now awake, and hungry as a
"starved kitten."

"I tell you what," said he to Bub, as they ate their morning meal,
"I've got a jolly plan for us. I'm going to dig a cave in the cellar,
so that if the Indians _should_ get into the cabin, we could hide
there just as we did in the tree."

"And you'll have some water in there for me to drink," suggested Bub.

"Yes," answered Charlie; "we'll have everything that we want."

So, assuring himself, by another examination, that matters outside
wore a peaceful aspect, he repaired to the cellar, to commence the
excavation. Luckily for Charlie's plan, the cellar walls had been
carelessly constructed, and in a corner he found a large-sized stone,
that he could remove from its place in the foundation without
disturbing the others. Taking this out, with the iron fire-shovel, he
soon had drawn forth a large quantity of the loose sand.

"Now," observed Charlie to Bub, "you must take the shovel, and throw
the sand about the cellar, while I work with my hands."

This was quite an easy task, the sand was so light and dry. And ere
long he had a place large enough to conceal himself and Bub.

"But," said he, "I shall make it extend farther in, so that if the
cabin is burnt over our heads, it won't be too hot for us."

But Bub made little headway in shovelling the sand; so Charlie
finished the job for him, and then from a heap of litter, which he had
before taken the precaution to scrape into a corner, he took enough to
cover the fresh sand all over.

"Now," said he, "let's try our new cave;" and, squeezing through the
hole from which he had taken the stone, Bub creeping in after him,
Charlie reached out and drew the stone into its place again. Charlie
was delighted.

"I like this!" he exclaimed; "it's more like Robinson Crusoe's
cave."

Bub thought he liked it too, but soon cried out, "I can't hardly
breeve; an' it's drefful dark."

"It's lucky I've tried it," replied Charlie; "but I'll fix it all
nice."

And pushing out the stone with his foot, he went up stairs, and
returned with an old bayonet, with which he succeeded in dexterously
working some small holes through the mortar, with which the crevices
of the ill-matched stones were filled. This was so ingeniously done,
that it would not be noticed; and yet enough light and air were let in
to make the place tolerable for the purpose for which it was
intended.

It was now past noon, and they went up stairs, and Charlie looked out
again, to see if there were any signs of danger; but still "all was
quiet along the Potomac."

"I don't think," sagely observed Charlie, "that the Indians are ever
coming back. In my opinion they have had about enough of fighting,
they cleared off so quick, and there is so many of them dead."

At which Bub waxed valiant, and said,--

"I wish I had my big stick to stick into their backs, if they do
come."

Charlie could not forbear a laugh at this, notwithstanding the
sanguinary scenes that had crowded the last few days with horrors, but
answered,--

"I know what you can do, Bub, to drive them away, if they should
come;" and, drawing a ball of twine from his pocket, he tied it to the
trigger of one of the mounted rifles, then feeling again in his pocket
for his knife to cut off the string, he said,--

"Where's my jackknife? I must have lost it in going to the spring for
water; lots of things tumbled out as I crawled through the grass.
Never mind; I can use a case-knife;" and, taking one from the table,
he divided the string so as to leave the end of it hanging within easy
reach of Bub. He did the same to all the guns.

"Now," he explained to Bub, "when I tell you to pull one of these
strings, you must do it as quick as you can. I will whisper, Pull! and
you must take right hold of the twine, and draw it so;" and, contrary
to Charlie's intention, bang went the rifle.

"Why, I didn't mean to do that; but it will show you how. Pulling the
string made the gun go off, you see."

Bub was all attention, and asked, eagerly,

"Shall I do it now?"

"O, no," replied Charlie. "I mean, when I _tell_ you to. When the
Indians come, and I say, _Pull!_ Suppose, for instance, I should get
up in this way,"--and he ascended to the lookout,--"and I should look
out in this way,"--and he put his eye to the port-hole,--"and I
should see a big Indian coming to kill Bub."

"Yes," answered the little listener, "I knows;" and his eyes glistened
with excitement.

"Well, as I was saying, I peep out, and I see a big Indian coming--"

Bub at this instinctively drew nearer the string, his gaze on
Charlie.

"And I should whisper, _Pull!_"

Instantly Bub's fat fist twitched the string, and a second report
echoed over the prairie.

"What did you do that for?" asked his brother, much displeased. "I
didn't wish you to do it now. I was only explaining how to do it, and
I want you to do it right. Don't touch the strings till I tell you;
and then, when I give the word, you'll pull--won't you?"

Curly-head looked as if he intended to stand by the guns.

"In that way, Bub," continued Charlie, "we could keep off a great many
Indians; I loading and firing, and you firing too, Bub. But I haven't
put that last rifle in just right;" and glancing out of the hole, as
he adjusted it, he turned deathly pale, and his whispered utterance
was strangely faint, as he exclaimed,--

"If there isn't an Indian now!"

It is said by old hunters accustomed to shoot small game, however
skilful in the use of fire-arms they may be, that the first time they
see a large animal,--a deer, for example,--such a nervous excitement
seizes them, although the creature stands within a few feet of them,
for an instant they cannot command themselves to fire; and when they
do, they are sure to miss the object. It is not surprising, then, that
Charlie was, for a moment, paralyzed. He gazed at the Indian as if
fascinated, as the savage glided along, his head bent, going from the
spring towards the tree, in the very path through which Charlie had
carried the water, stooping to pick up something, then keeping on a
few paces, then stopping and putting his ear to the ground, as if
intently listening. He was within easy range of Charlie's rifle all
the time; yet the boy lifted not his finger.

The savage now rapidly darted forward, as if following Charlie's
trail, and, sweeping the bushes back with his hand, discovered the
opening in the tree, and, to Charlie's amazement, managed to creep in.
Nearly an hour had passed, and Charlie still waited in painful
suspense, wondering what next would transpire, when he saw a score or
more of Indians stealthily approaching from different directions
towards the cabin. The blood returned to Charlie's face, and,
recovering his senses, he whispered to Bub, "The Indians have come."

He then took sight across the rifle nearest Bub, and found that it
covered several of the savages; and, taking aim with the one next to
it, he said to his little brother, "Pull!" Bub did so, and, starting
on the round trot, pulled each string in succession. A broadside
ensued that would have done honor to an old-fashioned ship of war. The
effect was prodigious. The savages seemed to think that a strong force
occupied the cabin; for, with a loud yell, and a hasty discharge of
fire-arms, they vanished from sight.

Charlie was astounded at Bub's misunderstanding of the order and the
effect produced. Gazing amazed into vacancy,--for the enemy had
disappeared,--he sprang to the floor, hugged Bub till he almost
suffocated him, and, laughing uncontrollably, stammered, "That beats
Robinson Crusoe!"

The scene was indeed ludicrous. The savages had come to carry off
their dead comrades, and, creeping cautiously along, had got so near
the house without being observed, that their suspicion that the cabin
was vacated became confirmed. The discharge of the rifles by the boys
was, therefore, a perfect surprise, the fact that they were permitted
to get so near before they were fired upon impressing them all the
more; for they well knew that, if few were in the dwelling to defend
it, every effort would have been put forth to keep them at a
distance. Moreover, the firing coming from all sides of the dwelling
at once, had also the appearance as if it was quite heavily manned.

It was a brilliant day, and the light puff of smoke from each rifle
rose at once into the air, giving Charlie a fine view of the field;
and the simultaneous springing up of so many astonished savages, their
queer grimaces, and the grotesque manner in which they scrambled out
of range, struck the lad as irresistibly comic, especially as he
considered that it was Bub's blunder that was at the bottom of the
rout.

Recovering himself, he proceeded to reload the rifles. But one thing
gave him uneasiness. The Indian, he was quite sure, was still in the
tree. What was he there for? "Perhaps," thought Charlie, "he will make
a hole through the tree, and watch his chance, and shoot me. At any
rate, he's a spy; and if he should find out that only Bub and I were
here, he might make us trouble."

He was puzzled to know what to do. He set himself to watch through the
port-hole to see if he would come out. Two long hours Charlie remained
at his post, till he grew weary with the duty. Then he bethought
himself of another plan. He had read in the old spelling book of the
boy who wouldn't descend from the farmer's apple tree for coaxing;
and the farmer said, "If you will not come down for words, I'll try
the effect of stones," which brought the trespasser quickly to the
ground. Now, the Indian was not _up_ a tree, but he was _in_ one, and
he would not come out for Charlie's watching; so Charlie thought he
would employ harder arguments, and, aiming at the point where he
supposed the savage must be in his hiding-place, he blazed away. He
had fired three times, when, suddenly, the tawny occupant slipped out,
and crouched behind the tree, from which he commenced making friendly
signs towards the corner of the cabin from which the bullets came.
Charlie understood the signals, but muttering, "You can't catch me
that way, old villain," continued firing every time he thought he
could hit the savage. The Indian had not, during all this, fired in
return. This seemed curious to the boy; but concluding it to be an
Indian trick, he determined not to be outwitted. Whatever the object
of the savage was in his mysterious conduct, he at last despaired of
accomplishing it, and adroitly slipped away.

As night drew its heavy curtains around the beleaguered cabin, Charlie
experienced a feeling of dread creeping over him. He felt
comparatively safe while he could see the foe; but now the night
seemed ominous of evil. The wind moaning through the trees, the
ticking of the insect under the bark in the logs, and even the shrill
chirping of the cricket, sounded unnatural to him. He thought of the
dead and gory forms stretched upon the greensward without; the grass
matted with human blood; the imprecations and fierce shouts that had
resounded, and the deathly struggles that passed before him while
sheltered by the friendly tree; the heavy tramp of men fighting in the
deadly struggle; the sharp reports of the fire-arms; the horrible
screams and heart-piercing pleadings of women and children as they
were murdered and tortured by the savages; the lurid glare of the
burning cabins; the Indians dancing and yelling in horrid mirth: his
active brain was filled with such remembrances. In the stillness and
loneliness of night, in that cabin, these awful scenes came up with
appalling vividness, and weird and demon faces seemed to peep and
mutter at him from the corners of the room. Once he fancied that he
heard the cellar stairs creak under a heavy tread. And while Bub slept
peacefully in childish unconsciousness of his brother's terror, he
shivered and watched through that long night until the rosy beams of
morning dispelled the illusions of the darkness.




CHAPTER XX.

LONG HAIR.


The news of Mr. Jones's death, together with the atrocities connected
with the Indian uprising, spread a gloom throughout the fort; and
when, two days later, the funeral of the pioneer took place, tears
were in many a veteran's eye. General McElroy respected the qualities
which had marked the last days of the deceased, and said,--

"He did not serve in the ranks, but if ever a man deserved a soldier's
burial, poor Jones does; and he shall have it."

So the body was borne to the grave under military escort, the soldiers
marching to the mournful strains of the funeral dirge and muffled
drums; the corpse was lowered to its last resting-place; the burial
service read with a trembling voice by the chaplain,--for the
missionary had taken his place among the mourners by the side of the
widow,--the usual salute was fired, and the procession retraced its
steps.

Mrs. Jones felt that she was now bereaved indeed, and almost alone in
the world, and it became a question with her what she could do, under
the circumstances, for herself and family. Disconsolately she
discussed this matter with Tom.

"I cannot remain longer in these apartments, living on the hospitality
of the general," said she; "and as your dear father is gone, it
becomes me to earn something for my own support. I must have Robert
with me, he is so young, and make some humble home where you can be
with us as much as possible. But what I can do to effect this I cannot
now see, there are so few opportunities for women to earn."

It goaded Tom that his mother was under the necessity of talking in so
depressed a way, and that he could do nothing suitably to provide for
her. At this juncture there was a gentle knock at the door, and Mrs.
McElroy entered.

"You will excuse me if I have intruded," said she; "but I came in to
ask what arrangements, if any, you had made for the future, and to say
that, if you have nothing better in view, the general and myself would
like to have you remain with us."

"But I have already been dependent on your hospitality too long,"
objected Mrs. Jones, "and it seems proper that I should make a home
for myself and Robert as soon as possible."

"Have you any suitable place provided as yet?" asked Mrs. McElroy.

"Not decisively," answered the widow.

"It could not be expected that you would so soon," answered Mrs.
McElroy. "Now we have a plan for you, which may be to our mutual
advantage. The little community dwelling within these brick walls is a
very social one, and the general's time and my own is so much
occupied, that my children suffer for a mother's care. You are exactly
the person we need to take the oversight of them. Your own children
are a credit to you; they show that you have just the qualities of
mind and heart for such a position. Now, if you will look a little
after my children's training, you will take a burden from my hands,
and a load of anxiety from my mind, and between us both, I think we
can manage so as not to be overcharged."

"But Robert--" began Mrs. Jones, hesitatingly.

"The general has taken a great fancy to him, and says if he can have
him he will make something of him; and what my husband undertakes he
never does by halves. Robert would have the best of advantages, and be
under your own eye."

Mrs. Jones's emotions were too great for words. This unexpected
provision for herself and boy seemed truly providential. She might go
the world over and not meet with such delicate and appreciative
treatment. Still she hesitated. Her life in the squatter's cabin
through so many years of deprivation and poverty placed her, in her
own consciousness, in such painful contrast to the courtly and
elegant Mrs. McElroy, that she felt diffident about accepting so
responsible a trust. And she understood children well enough to
know that the offspring of the rich often look down on those in
humbler circumstances. Would the general's children respect her as
they should, in order for her to assume such a relation towards them
as their mother wished? These thoughts passed rapidly through her
mind, and, in justice to them as well as herself, she felt that
she would like to have that point put to rest. She was a woman of
straightforward good sense, and therefore decided to be frank in the
matter, and asked,--

"But would the arrangement be agreeable to your children, madam?"

Mrs. McElroy had foreseen this, and was prepared with an answer. She
rang the bell, and black Nancy appeared.

"Send Alice and Willie here," she said; and in a moment the brother
and sister came running in.

"Children," said their mother, "I've been trying to persuade Mrs.
Jones to stay with us, and take charge of you. How would you like
that?"

"O, that would be so nice!" said Alice, crossing to Mrs. Jones, and
putting her arms around her neck--an action that was peculiar to her.

"It would be real good in her, I'm sure," chimed in Willie; "and then
I could have Robert to play with me,--he makes splendid
popguns,--couldn't I, mother?"

So it was settled, and in such a manner that Mrs. Jones was made to
feel that she was conferring a favor, rather than having one conferred
on her; and, in fact, the arrangement was mutually advantageous, as
Mrs. McElroy had sincerely remarked.

Mr. Payson now called to take leave of the widow, and ask if Tom would
like to return with him. He was much pleased with the arrangement,
expressing anew his sympathy with her in her bereavements, and,
charging her to cling to the consolation of the gospel, he and Tom
took their departure, the latter tenderly kissing his mother and
Robert as he bade them good by.

"You must come often and see your mother," said Mrs. McElroy,
cordially; "you know we shall be like one family hereafter; and not
only Robert and your mother will be lonesome without you, but the rest
of the children will be glad to have you join them in their
amusements and studies," to which assurance Alice and Willie looked
their approval. As the wheels of the missionary's buggy rumbled out of
the square, Mrs. Jones said with a sigh,--

"What a change has come over my flock within a few days! my husband,
and Sarah, and dear little Bub murdered by the Indians, and Charlie,
also, I suppose I must say, although there is something peculiarly
trying in the mystery that hangs over his fate."

"You do not really know, then, what became of him," observed Mrs.
McElroy.

"No; and this uncertainty is agonizing. Perhaps he was captured by the
Indians, and may be at this very moment suffering the most barbarous
treatment from them; or the dear boy may have been devoured by a wild
beast, or he may be starving in the wilderness. This suspense
concerning him is too much to bear;" and she looked anxiously out of
the window.

But the hour for dinner had arrived, and Mrs. Jones and Robert went
down with the others to dine. As they entered the dining-room, the
general directed their attention to the corner of the room; and there,
wrapped in his blanket, sat an Indian, whom Mrs. Jones, after the
first start of surprise, recognized as Long Hair.

"Mrs. Jones," said the general, "perhaps you can find out what the
red-skin wants. He isn't very communicative with me, but seems anxious
to see your Tom."

"I am glad to meet you," said Mrs. Jones, kindly, to the savage. "Have
you anything of importance to communicate?"

But Long Hair appeared as if something had gone wrong with him, and
sat in moody silence.

"Will you not speak to me, Long Hair?" asked Mrs. Jones. "You know
I've always treated you well--have I not?"

"White squaw good to Injin. Sojer say Injin lie; sojer call Long Hair
dog; tell him go way."

"Some of your men have ill-treated Long Hair, I'm afraid," said Mrs.
Jones to the general.

"Well," said the general, "I'll see that they don't do it any more;"
and, wishing to propitiate the tawny brave, he added, "perhaps Long
Hair would take some dinner with us." But the Indian wasn't so easily
appeased, and said,--

"Long Hair no beggar-dog; Long Hair shoot deer, shoot raccoon, catch
fish, plenty!"

"But," interposed Mrs. Jones, "didn't you bring some venison to my
cabin one day, and did I refuse it, Long Hair?"

"White squaw good," he repeated; "Long Hair never forget. Long Hair
sick; white squaw medicine him. Long Hair kill deer for white
squaw."

"Yes," said Mrs. Jones; "you were sick, and I took care of you, as I
ought to; and you have been very kind to me and mine, and I shall
never forget it."

Under her gentle influence, the Indian was persuaded to partake of the
food placed before him. He ate with a voracity which showed that he
had been long fasting, and his appearance indicated that he had seen
hardship and danger. Mrs. Jones was satisfied that his coming
portended something to her, either good or evil; and, from his
reserve, she feared it might be the latter, and the better to draw out
of him the tidings, whatever they might be, related the circumstances
attending her husband's death, referring to the murder of Sarah and
little Bub, and the disappearance of Charlie, adding, that she
supposed he was also killed. The Indian listened in silence till she
spoke of Charlie and little Bub, and then, with energy, exclaimed,--

"Charlie no dead! Bub no dead!"

"But Bub must be dead," said Mrs. Jones; "for I saw him shot by Yellow
Bank."

"No; Injin speak truth."

"What makes you think so?" asked she, astonished.

Long Hair made no reply; but drawing from beneath his blanket a
little shoe, he placed it on the edge of the table; then, by its side,
he laid an old battered jackknife.

"Why, Long Hair!" cried Mrs. Jones, deeply agitated; "that's Bub's
shoe, and Charlie's knife. Where did you get them?" a ray of hope
springing up in her heart.

"Long Hair went find Charlie; travel much; peep in wigwam much; no
find. Long Hair say Charlie no killed; Charlie no taken prisoner;
Charlie hid near cabin. Long Hair look all 'bout near cabin; see
Charlie hand put down so," spreading his fingers, "in mud at spring;
den Long Hair say, Charlie thirsty; been spring for water; find trail;
find knife in trail, near big tree; find shoe near big tree; Bub hid
in tree; then Long Hair push bush way; see hole in tree. Long Hair
hear Injins coming; Long Hair crawl in tree quick; no Charlie there;
no Bub there; find these in tree;" taking from his blanket a handful
of nuts, and some potatoes, and a crust of bread, and some trinkets
that must have fallen from Charlie's pocket; "den Long Hair see Injins
come, one, two, tree, ten, twenty, many; come all round, crawling,
crawling; get near cabin; Injin think nobody in cabin, 'cause get
near; rifle shoot from cabin, one, two, tree, many rifle; scare Injin;
Injin run like deer; Long Hair wait to see if Injin come again; no
come; shoot from cabin at Long Hair; come out tree; get behind tree
quick; make peace sign at cabin,--no bleeve Long Hair; try shoot at
him; Long Hair come way--come to fort!"

"Well, that's strange," said General McElroy; "from Long Hair's
account, there seems to be a number in the cabin; it must be that all
the settlers were not massacred, and have returned, and taken
possession of the cabin; we must send a force to their relief."

"But where are Charlie and Bub?" asked Mrs. Jones of the Indian.

"Long Hair don't know; think in cabin."

"How many persons, should you judge from the firing, were in the
cabin?" inquired the general.

"Long Hair don't know; no trail."

"What does Long Hair mean by that?" asked Mrs. McElroy of her
husband.

"He means that there is no appearance of any of the settlers being
about the cabin," said the general, "which makes the matter still more
incomprehensible; for if any of the settlers had come back, Long Hair
would have traced them. Isn't that it, Long Hair?" The Indian nodded
assent. "And yet he says that there were many guns fired," continued
the general; "so many that quite a force of the assailing Indians were
panic-struck, and fled. How was the firing done, Long Hair? As if by
persons that were used to handling the rifle?"

"One, two, tree, bery good; hit Injin some; shoot at Long Hair good;
much hard get way; to the most, much poor--shoot here, shoot dere,
shoot everywhere!"

"But what makes you think the children are in the cabin?" asked Mrs.
Jones; for, mother-like, her thoughts were constantly recurring to
them.

"Trail go towards cabin," replied the sagacious red man; "couldn't
follow trail; shoot Long Hair if he follow trail."

"I think that Long Hair is right," said the general, striking the
table with the flat of his hand: "your boys were born to be heroes,
madam. If I mistake not, that Charlie and Bub of yours were the
defenders of that cabin against the savages. And yet," he added,
doubtfully, "that is simply absurd; it's beyond the power of two
little boys to perform such a feat; for you recollect, ladies, that
Long Hair said that not only a number of guns were fired, but at the
same time; and to conclude that two little boys should fire off a
score of guns, more or less, simultaneously, is to assent to a
physical impossibility. The truth is, the deeper I go into this
matter, the more I'm puzzled. What is your opinion of it, Long
Hair?"

"Long Hair no sense; no tell; mind much dark;" and the Indian seemed
mortified that his sagacity was for once at fault. "No white settlers
in cabin; Charlie and Bub in cabin; much gun fire; hurt two, tree
Injin; scare much Injin--don't know."

"He means that he is certain that no settlers have returned to the
cabin," explained Mrs. Jones, "but that Charlie and Bub are there;
while as to who shot off so many fire-arms, he is as much in the dark
as ourselves."

"Well," said the general, rising, "there is one way to clear up this
mystery. I'll send a trusty detachment there at once to open the
secrets of the cabin."

Long Hair rose at this, and said,--

"White chief send sojer to cabin, right way, bimeby, quick?"

"Yes," replied the general, "and I should like to have you go with
them as guide."

"No," answered the Indian, sententiously; "Long Hair go 'lone; Long
Hair always go 'lone;" and, starting at a quick pace, he was speedily
out of sight.




CHAPTER XXI.

"PULL THE STRING, BUB."


The high state of excitement into which Charlie had been kept by the
startling events connected with the massacre, and his ingenious
defence of the cabin, brought about a reaction; great lassitude
alternated with feverish symptoms. He felt obliged to watch during the
long hours of night, and caught such snatches of sleep as Bub's
performances allowed by day.

One day, after Bub had had his breakfast, Charlie said,--

"I feel as if I was going to be sick, Bub; my mouth tastes dreadfully,
and my head aches so I can scarcely see. If I shouldn't get well, and
the Indians should come, you must remember and go into the hole in the
cellar, and pull the stone up in its place after you, just as I showed
you how, and keep still same as we did in the tree."

"And shall I have to take the toffee-pot and go to the spring, same's
you did?"

"No," said Charlie; "the Indians would see you and kill you if you
did, and we have a well in the yard. But I'll tell you what I'll do.
I'll bring a pail of cold water now, and fill the coffee-pot, and put
it into the hole, and a good lot of food there for you to eat, so that
you wouldn't have to come out for anything; and, Bub, if I should die,
and father and mother should come and take you away, I want you to
tell them that I put the water and the food there; won't you?"

"Yes," said Bub; "and I'll let them hide in our tree; mayn't I,
Charlie?"

"Yes," answered Charlie; "you must tell them all you can remember;
tell them that I tried to be a good boy; tell mother,"--speaking very
softly,--"that every night we said 'Now I lay me;' and don't you never
forget to say, 'Now I lay me;' will you, Bub?"

"No, I won't," said Bub; "tos, if I'm dood, like you and mother, and
say, 'Now I lay me' every night, when I die Dod will send a big angel
down to take me up to heaven; won't he, Charlie?"

"Yes," said Charlie. "Now I'll go get the water;" and, walking with
unsteady step to the well, he returned with a pail of water, and,
filling the coffee-pot, descended, feebly, to the cellar, and placed
it in the hole which he had dug; then, carrying most of the provisions
that they had, deposited them there also, and going up stairs again,
he started for the bed, but suddenly stopped, and putting his hand
over his eyes, said,--

"O, where is it? I can't see, I'm so dizzy," and fell by the side of
it, on the hard floor. Bub looked on in wonder, scarcely comprehending
the meaning of it, saying,--

"Did the cellar hurt you, Charlie?" But there was no answer. In a few
moments after, Charlie opened his eyes, and said,--

"Bub, I'm dreadful sick; if the Indians should come,--and you must
watch for them, Bub, else they might come when you wasn't looking,--"

Then he relapsed into silence.

"Did you 'peak, Charlie?" said Bub, wondering that he did not finish
the sentence. The dear little voice seemed to recall his wandering
thoughts, and, taking up what he was saying where he had left off,
continued,--

"If the Indians should come, Bub, remember and pull the strings;
perhaps that will frighten them off, as it did before. If it doesn't,
go right into the hole in the cellar, as I told you."

"I fraid to go into the cellar 'out you."

"But you must," answered Charlie, "or the Indians will kill you. But
you won't feel afraid if you pray God to take care of you."

"Is Dod stronger than dark?" asked Bub.

"Yes," said Charlie, "he made the dark; he made you, and everything;
but," he added, "I feel better; I guess I'll get on the bed; it's
easier there."

Charlie was threatened with brain fever, as his bloodshot eyes,
flushed face, and throbbing temples revealed. The strain had been too
great for him, and he soon seemed to be unconscious of what was
passing around him, and moaned and tossed incessantly. Chary of his
scanty store of provisions, not knowing how long they might be shut up
in the cabin, he had eaten sparingly himself, but fed Bub generously,
not only from love to his little brother, but because it would keep
him the more quiet. The night-watching had worn on him terribly.

Bub had small comprehension of Charlie's condition; and finding, after
a while, that Charlie did not talk with him, he took the post of
sentinel, and did himself great credit. This seemed a long period to
the little fellow, and after going the rounds of the port-hole, and
seeing nothing to alarm him, he set about amusing himself. The skin
bag, containing the ammunition, caught his eye; so, getting the
fire-shovel, he managed to dislodge it from the peg on which it hung,
and down it plumped upon the floor. Bub looked towards Charlie at
this, to see what he would say, but, as he did not seem to notice,
lugged the bag to the hearth, and commenced strewing the powder upon
the fire. This was highly satisfactory, and one little puff would go
up, sending out the white ashes, to be succeeded by another, as fast
as the fat fist of the little mischief-maker could work. Then he began
to strew the powder out from the hearth upon the floor; and he clapped
his hands in glee, as he saw the fire run along the trains that he had
laid. Very careless was he in his pyrotechnic contrivances, and might
have found himself involved in a grand explosion, had he not bethought
himself that, if powder was good to burn, it was also good to eat.
Now, it chanced that Charlie, in his investigations in the cupboard,
had come across a neglected jug, that contained molasses; and as
molasses was much prized by Bub, he had kept it for that little boy's
sole use, dealing it out to him, a little at a time, at each meal. So,
bringing out the jug and a saucer, Bub filled the latter with
molasses, into which he stirred the powder, and commenced eating the
sweet mixture. He knew he had been into mischief that would displease
his brother; so, denying himself the first taste, taking the saucer
and spoon in his hand, he trudged to the bedside, and said,--

"Bub made Charlie some tandy. Bub good boy."

But, as Charlie gave no heed to the peace-offering, Bub put the saucer
upon the table, and, seating himself in his usual place at meal time,
commenced eating. The compound was not so pleasant as its inventor had
expected, and, after the first few spoonfuls, was abandoned in
disgust. It now occurred to him that it was time to resume his post as
sentry. Mounting to his first outlook, his little blue eyes dilated,
for he saw an Indian creeping along.

"Charlie," said he, jumping down in terror. "Injun come to kill Bub!"

But, as Charlie did not reply, he clambered on the bed, crying,--

"Charlie, 'peak to Bub; Injun come!" Then, supposing that the reason
he made no answer was because he had burnt the powder, he said, with
quivering lip,--

"Bub's sorry he's been naughty; Bub won't be naughty no more. Bub love
Charlie;" and he put his little face lovingly against Charlie's. But
he started back as Charlie's hot cheeks touched his tender flesh.
Remembering how hot his own flesh was when tortured with thirst in the
tree, and how grateful the draught of water was Charlie fetched from
the spring at the risk of his life, Bub exclaimed,--

"Charlie dry; Bub give Charlie some drink!" and hastening to the
table, he took from it the large bowl, and filled it from the bucket
that Charlie had left on the floor, and, climbing with it on the bed
again, essaying to put it to his lips, upset the whole over his face
and neck. The sudden application of the cold water proved a balm to
the sick boy, and, recognizing Bub, he inquired, confusedly,--

"Where--where am I?--what's the matter?"

"Injun's come!" cried Bub, with renewed earnestness.

Charlie attempted to rise, but fell back, exhausted, saying, while a
growing faintness crept over him,--

"I can't get up, Bub, I'm so sick; pull the string."

Bub did as he was directed, and again the cabin fort broke the
stillness of prairie and forest with its unmanned broadside.

"Now," said Charlie, his voice sinking to a whisper, "go and hide
yourself in the cellar, Bub, and keep very still."

"I 'fraid 'out you!" said Bub.

"I am so sick," answered Charlie, "I can't go with you."

"I so 'fraid!" quivered Bub, as he saw the deathly pallor creeping
over Charlie's face, and the fixed look of his eyes.

"Pray, and then go and keep still," said Charlie.

And little Bub knelt by the bedside, and, folding his hands,
repeated,--

                  "Now I lay me down to sleep;
                  I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
                  If I should die before I wake,
                  I pray the Lord my soul to take;"

and then adding, of his own accord, "Please, Dod, take care of
Charlie, and don't let the dark hurt Bub;" rising, he said, "Bub isn't
'fraid now;" and, descending into the cellar, he crept into his
hiding-place in the wall, and carefully readjusted the stone.

The Indian that Bub had seen was Long Hair. While he was cautiously
reconnoitring, the command under Captain Manly had reached the ground.
The soldiers found the outer door securely fastened, and, though they
thundered for admittance, there was no response from within. In their
impatience, some broke down the door, while others scaled the walls.
Captain Manly was the first to enter, and the soldiers pushed in
eagerly after him, anxious to rescue the settlers, if any were there
still. Instantly his eye caught the figure stretched on the bed.

"Hush, boys," said he, reverently; "the little fellow is dead."

Tears filled the eyes of the men as they gathered about their officer,
and gazed silently upon the features of the boy. A placid look was
upon the brave lad's countenance; his curly-brown hair lay in dank
masses, in fine contrast to his white forehead; while the lessons of
self-control, which he had been taught, made his expression mature and
noble. Captain Manly stooped and kissed the cold forehead, and the
soldiers instinctively lifted their caps.

Meanwhile, the cabin had been carefully searched.

"There's not a soul in it," said Sergeant Eaton, touching his cap.
"The little lad yonder seems to have been all alone."

"Impossible. What did that firing mean from the cabin, just as we rode
up? And here, you see, are no less than a dozen rifles, all nicely
mounted. Where are the fingers that pulled the triggers? Sergeant,
there is some mystery here that needs to be unravelled. Have you
searched the cellar?"

"We have, sir," was the reply.

The officers stood looking at each other perplexed, and were
continuing their conversation in a low tone, when Long Hair entered,
and without noticing any one, stood, with folded arms, gazing at
Charlie.

"Long Hair," said the captain, turning abruptly towards him, "how long
did you get here before we did?"

"Little time--not much."

"Were you on the ground when we heard the discharge?"

"In tree; just here; over dere."

"Did any one leave the cabin after the guns were fired?"

"No leave cabin," he answered.

"Who do you think fired the guns, Long Hair?"

"Charlie fire gun."

"But Charlie is dead; and the discharge was only a few moments ago."

"No; Indian no sense; Charlie no fire gun. Bub fire gun."

"Impossible," returned the captain, impatiently. "How could such a
child do it?"

"What string for, cap'n?" asked Long Hair, pointing to the twine that
hung from the gun triggers, which, being so near the color of the
walls, had been detected only by the Indian's keen glance. This
ingenious arrangement was examined with interest; and the conviction
was fast gaining ground, that Long Hair was not far from right in his
conclusions.

"But where is the child?" asked the captain; and again they searched
the cabin. The closet was peered into to its topmost shelf; a few
boxes that had been left, emptied of their contents; even the bed on
which Charlie lay was minutely examined, and the improbable
supposition that the walls of the cellar might conceal him was
renounced, as the soldiers struck the butts of their guns against the
stones.

"Is it possible," asked the captain of Long Hair,--for he had learned
to rely much on his sagacity,--"that Bub could escape from the
house?"

Long Hair shook his head, saying,--

"No trail; Bub no go."

"May it plase your honor," said the Irish private, O'Connor, touching
his cap to the captain, "I belave, on me sowl, that it's the ghost of
the brave lad that shot the guns. The likes of him, sir, would be
afther defendin' the cabin if 'twas only out of respect to the
onburied bodies of the women and the childers that has been murthured
by the hathen savages--bad luck to 'em!"

"Long Hair," said the captain, smiling at the superstition of the
warm-hearted Hibernian, "I've a mind, while the men are taking their
rations on the grass, to leave you to clear up this mystery; I
believe, if any one can find it out, you can."

The men, having fallen into line, stacked their guns, and Long Hair
was left alone with Charlie. He stood for a moment looking at the
quiet form of the boy; and the workings of his usually stolid face
showed the affection which he felt for him. He then carefully looked
about the room, then went quietly out, and passed around the cabin,
critically examining the ground as he walked. He soon returned, and
made directly for the cellar, gliding noiselessly in his moccasins
down the stairs. In the dim light he carefully went over the cellar
bottom. Taking up some of the litter with which it was covered, he
gently scraped the fresh sand away until he came to litter again.
Patiently and carefully then he removed the top litter from a wide
space, noticing from which direction the sand had been thrown, and in
a moment he was standing where the heap had been, which Charlie and
Bub had shovelled away. Stooping down now, he saw where the earth had
been fretted by the stone as it had been pulled out and in; then he
placed his ear to the ground, and listened intently; instantly he
glided from the cellar, and stood with folded arms before Captain
Manly.

"Well, what luck?" asked the captain.

"Long Hair find pappoose."

There was a general excitement at this, and a number arose, as if
eager to follow the captain and the Indian; but Long Hair stirred not,
saying, angrily,--

"Too much sojer; scare pappoose."

"That is sensible," said the captain; "you and I will go alone, Long
Hair."

The Indian led him at once to the place in the wall where Bub was
concealed.

"Pappoose in dere," said the Indian, pointing to the stone. "Take
stone out."

The captain drew it forth, got down on his hands and knees, and peeped
in, and saw Bub's bright eyes looking into his; and, taking hold of
Bub's chubby hand, he said, soothingly,--for Bub now began to cry,--

"Don't be afraid, my little fellow; we are all your friends, and have
come to take you to your mother."

"Won't Injun kill me?" asked Bub, glancing apprehensively at Long
Hair.

"No," said the officer; "it's Long Hair; he came to keep the bad
Indians from killing you."

When Captain Manly appeared with Bub in his arms, the air was rent
with the joyful shouts of the soldiers; and Bub suddenly found himself
a hero, as he was borne about and caressed by them--a joy that was
suddenly intensified to a wild pitch of excitement, as word was
brought that dear, brave, romantic Charlie had revived. He was not
dead. Aroused by the shouts of the soldiers over Bub's appearance, he
had opened his eyes, and, imagining that the Indians were assailing
the cabin, murmured, in a clear, distinct voice,--

"Pull the string, Bub!"




CHAPTER XXII.

TOM AND THE MONEY-LENDER.


Mr. Cowles--farmer, grocer, postmaster, and money-lender--drew his
chair to the fire. The large, old-fashioned stove had an open front,
and it was pleasant, on such a piercing day, to see the flames leap,
and hear the wood crackle, and sit in the genial warmth.

The table was neatly set for supper. There was a platter of cold
prairie chicken, a glass dish containing wild-plum sauce, and a plate
of biscuit; while on the stove hearth stood a white tureen, holding a
few slices of hot toast.

Mrs. Cowles, having been informed by her liege lord that her presence
was not desired at that particular hour, had gladly improved the
opportunity to take a cup of tea with her friend Mrs. Barker, and
learn the particulars concerning the accident that happened to Bill
Walker and Maria Hobbs the night before, who, while returning from a
log-house dance, six miles away, were upset from the wagon into Slough
Creek. Mrs. Cowles dearly loved a dish of gossip, which, smoking hot
and seasoned to one's taste, was always to be had at Mrs. Barker's.

The Cowles were a money-loving and money-getting race, from the least
of them to the greatest; and Mr. Charles Cowles was not a whit behind
the shrewdest of them in this respect.

It was a stormy afternoon in March, and the winds, which, like troops
of wild horses, came careering across the prairies, and charged upon
the money-lender's "framed" house, furiously whirled the snow, and
made shrill, wintry music. Mr. Cowles added more fuel to the fire,
reseated himself, put his feet into a chair, and fell into a deep
study.

He was the moneyed man of the place, and, although comparatively a
new comer, was the autocrat of the settlement. His first visit to the
town, "prospecting," caused considerable commotion; for if the
groves and prairies had been arranged on the plan of a vast
whispering-gallery, the fact that he had a golden purse could
scarcely have circulated more rapidly. Many prophesied he would not
condescend to dwell in so small a town--a surmise that seemed the
more probable from his haughty, overbearing carriage. And when it
was certain that he had bought out the best of the two stores, and
carpenters were set to work building a large addition to the
grocery, and teams arrived from the Mississippi loaded with barrels
and boxes of goods, there was general congratulation. The town will
go ahead now, the settlers said; men of capital are beginning to
come in, and land is sure to rise.

But Mr. Cowles did not pitch his tent there for the benefit of the
public, as the public soon had reason to know. He invested nothing in
"improvements," but simply kept his stock replenished, selling at the
high frontier prices, giving credit when wanted, but always taking
ample security, and letting money in the same way, at five per cent.
per month.

The settlers had met with the usual financial disappointments of the
frontier, and then a business revulsion at the east caused a fall in
the value of land, and a diminution of immigration; and, having
expended the little they had on their arrival, they were compelled to
do as best they could. In this extremity it became common for them to
get trusted at the store for groceries, and hire money of its
proprietor; and in an astonishingly short space of time, the sharp
grocer held mortgages on most of the farms in the neighborhood. He was
inexorable when pay-day came; and if the money was not ready, he
foreclosed, deaf to all appeals. But of this he invariably gave each
one who applied for a loan an offensively plain warning. He was a
middle-sized, broad-chested, black-eyed man, muscular, passionate,
blasphemously profane, heavy-voiced, had a remarkable command of
language, and when angered his eyes seemed to shoot lightning, and he
would gesticulate with great energy. There was no respect of persons
or station with him; high and low were served alike. When credit or
money was asked for, he would say,--

"Certainly, sir; but, mind you," with a fearful oath, "if you don't
pay according to agreement, I shan't wait a moment. Everybody that
deals with me has to be on the square. O, yes; you _expect_ to pay,
but you won't. And don't you come whining and crying round me then; it
won't make any sort of difference. I've put my grip on your land, and
I tell you now that I shan't let go. Don't you say, then, that I
didn't tell you beforehand just how it would turn out."

The money-lender of the young village was feared, hated, and fawned
upon. His bearing was imperious and sneering towards all. He had a
vigorous intellect, however, was uncommonly well-informed, and would
discourse to the groups in his store, sitting with his stout legs
hanging over the counter, with a coarse brilliancy, original and
sagacious, from which the more cultured might cull gems of thought,
fresh and striking, despite the terrible swearing, which would startle
even bad men.

Was there "a well in the rock" of this man's hard heart? We shall
see.

The lines of the money-lender's face were bitterly hard; but on this
afternoon his features worked as if strong conflicting emotions were
striving for mastery. Something unusual was stirring his brain; he sat
thinking, thinking, uneasily shifting his position, and at length
arose, and passing through a dark hall, entered the shop, and said,--

"Ah, Tom, is that you?"

"Yes," answered the young man, diffidently; "Mr. Payson said you
wished to see me."

"Yes, walk in this way;" and Mr. Cowles returned to the home-room,
followed by Tom.

"Do you know why I sent for you?" asked the grocer.

"No, sir."

"Well, I had a little private matter that I wished to talk with you
about; but I'm hungry as a bear, and if you'll do me the favor to
drink a cup of tea with me, I'll try to explain."

Tom had ever shrunk from contact with this man, and marvelled much at
finding himself his guest. Yet a cosy sitting down together they had,
Tom's host being singularly attentive to him, while they partook of
the nice edibles.

"Tom," said the grocer, as they sat back from the table, "I've heard
good accounts of you;" and his voice grew soft and tremulous; "and
I'm really glad of it. And I've had an eye on you myself quite a
while; and, bad as they say old Cowles is, I like to see others do
well. You stuck by your folks when you wished to go off; that's right.
You made the most of your schooling; that's in your favor. You are an
honest, right-minded lad, aiming to be, I suspect, some such a man as
that missionary."

Tom's surprise grew apace. How did this rough, swearing, covetous
dealer ferret out his heart's secrets?

"You wished to go from home to study, but, like a true son, staid by
to help the family. That must have been a great self-denial to you;
was it not?"

"Yes," faltered Tom.

"Of course it was. But how did you manage to give it up so bravely?"

"Mother advised me to pray about it, and I did."

"Do you think it does any good to pray?" asked the grocer.

"O, yes, indeed. I couldn't live without prayer, it helps me so
much."

"But," objected his questioner, "do you imagine that the great God
cares enough about our little affairs to answer the trifling requests
we may make of him?"

"I do, sir," replied Tom, with glowing cheeks and tearful eyes; "I
have known him to do so many and many a time."

"Perhaps you were deceived."

"O," cried Tom, "if you had been in the missionary's family as much as
I have, and heard him pray for things, and then see just what he asked
for come into the house almost before he arose from his knees, you
could not doubt that God had heard him. Why, sir, how do you suppose
he has managed to get along on the little that the settlers have paid
him, unless it has been in answer to prayer?"

"I am sure he must have been pinched," answered the money-lender,
moving uneasily.

"I would like to relate an instance or two," continued Tom, "if it
would not be--"

"No, no, it won't be disagreeable to me; but I have not time to hear
it now. I believe all you say. I tell you what it is, young man," he
added, rising and pacing the floor, deeply agitated, "I know more
about these matters than folks think. There's my brother; he's a
Methodist minister, just like this missionary about praying. He's
often prayed for me, and says he has the evidence that I shall be
converted, and become a preacher."

"Perhaps you will," earnestly remarked Tom; "you have ability enough
to do a great deal of good."

"So he says. What if it should come about! How strange it would seem
for a cursing old sinner like me to preach and pray as that missionary
does! They call me a _hard_ man. But what can I do? Don't I inform
every soul that asks me for money that he's a fool, and that I shall
hold him to the writing? I get their lands, it is true; but if I did
not, somebody else would. Why, they mortgage all they have, and then
buy the highest priced goods in the store. I've no patience with such
folks, and they don't get much mercy from me."

"But," bluntly said Tom, "I can't see how another's wrong-doing
justifies ours."

"That's so," he returned, gloomily. "But I've a different sort of
business to transact with you, than to defend my misdeeds. That
missionary has been making me a pastoral visit, and he took it upon
himself to inform me that the Lord has called you to preach the
gospel, and that it is my duty to furnish money to send you off to
college, or some such place, where they grind out ministers."

"Me!" exclaimed Tom, rising to his feet.

"Yes, you; sit down, sit down, young man, and be calm;" and the
grocer, in his own excitement, gesticulated violently with both arms
at once. "He says that I'm the only man here that has the money to do
this. Pretty cool--isn't it?--to dictate to old Cowles, the miserly
money-grabber, in that way. I just turned on my heel, and left him in
the middle of his ordering; but, you see, I couldn't help thinking
about it night and day. I wouldn't wonder if that meddling missionary
had been praying about it all the while; and the result is, the old
money-lender is going to give you a lift, my boy. We, hackneyed,
hopeless old reprobates, need just such preachers as the missionary's
famous seminary is going to make out of you; and I invited you here to
say that you can depend on me for two hundred dollars in gold to start
with, and as much more each year, till you graduate, as the missionary
says you need. When old Cowles begins to do a thing, mind you, he
never does it by halves."

"But," said Tom, choking with joy and wonder, "how shall I pay you?"

"Pay! pay!" roared the grocer, his eyes shooting flame; then, suddenly
waxing tender, the tears extinguishing the fire-flashes, "if you will
pray for a poor old rebel like me, it is all the pay I want."

Then, going into the entry, he called,--

"Johnson! Johnson!"

"Here, sir," said a voice; and the dapper little tailor, who rented a
window in the store, made his appearance.

"Measure this young man for a suit of clothes," said the grocer; "and
mind and give him a genteel fit, that will do for him in the best
circles east."




CHAPTER XXIII.

AN ENCHANTING SCENE.--THE PARTING.


               "The hearth is swept, the fire is made,
                 The kettle sings for tea."

It was the clear, honest voice of Deacon Palmer that fell on Tom's
ear, and which he now heard for the hundredth time. Year in and out,
at morning and night, the good man had sung this, his favorite
song,--bachelor though he was, with silver-streaked hair,--as if his
heart yearned for the wifely waiting, and the sweet home-joys it
pictured. Why were they not his? Do all have their longings for
something brighter and better than the present brings? something for
which they must wait and wait, and perchance never attain?

Tom knocked modestly at the storekeeper's door. A moment, and the
money-lender opened it, saying, heartily,--

"Walk in; walk in!"

"No, I thank you," answered Tom; "I called to say, that as I am to
start on Monday to begin study at the east,"--and the young man's
tones grew tremulous,--"General and Mrs. McElroy and mother are to be
at the missionary's to-day, and they desire the pleasure of your
company at dinner."

"Well, well, young man, you _have_ brought a message--haven't you?"
exclaimed the grocer, fidgeting about. "A pretty mixed-up company that
would be--wouldn't it? Old Cowles sitting down to table with a
minister of the gospel, and a student for that sacred calling, and
such like folks. No, no; that wouldn't be consistent. Tell them that I
am much obliged, but--"

"Now, Mr. Cowles," exclaimed Tom, seizing his hand, "you must come. I
shall feel dreadfully hurt if you refuse,--and they all want you to so
much. And, you know that if it was not for your kindness--"

"There, there, boy," interrupted the storekeeper, his black eyes
flashing through tears, "don't talk in that way. All is, if it will
please you, I'll come. But how do you go to the river, Monday?"

"O, the missionary is to get a team."

"Well, just say to him that my horses are at his service."

We will not dwell upon the dinner in the log-cabin parsonage, during
which "irrepressible" Bub--his clerical tastes sharpened by Tom's
example--took clandestine possession of the attic study, and,
constituting himself preacher, audience, and choir, undertook to
conduct divine service. Having given out the first hymn, he drowned
the missionary's words, as the latter said grace, by stoutly
singing,--

                       "I want to be an angel,
                       An angel with a stand."

Neither may we linger amid the tender, solemn scenes of the Sabbath
following, the last Tom was to spend in the rude frontier sanctuary.

It was evening of a beautiful day in May, when the money-lender's
capacious carriage, drawn by his trusty grays, deposited its
passengers at the landing, to await the steamer. What a lifetime of
thought and emotion seemed crowded into that interval of waiting, as
Mrs. Jones stood with Tom clasped closely, whispering words of mingled
foreboding, hope, and caution!

"To be a _good_ minister of Jesus Christ, how glorious, how sublime!"
said she. "There is nothing I so much desire for you. But you are
going into scenes very different from those in which you have been
reared--scenes which will have their peculiar and insidious perils. I
foresee that you will rise to distinction in your studies. But do not
seek high things for yourself. Be not anxious to become what is called
a great preacher, nor aspire to a 'brilliant settlement.' Sacrifice
not conscience for place and power and the applause of sect. Keep
humble. Keep Christ ever before you; and may he watch between me and
thee while we are separated from each other;" and she kissed him a
fond farewell. Tom stepped aboard the steamer, which rapidly bore him
away, carrying in his heart the images of the godly missionary,
fair-haired Alice, and his mother--the little group that stood on the
shore gazing so lovingly after him. The young man wept freely as they
faded from sight. But, happily, the magical splendor of night on the
Mississippi broke in on the tumult of his feelings. Hundreds of lights
gleamed from the shore in every direction; from village, and city, and
town; from cottage and homestead; while steamer after steamer,
illuminated within and without, came sweeping, sounding, thundering
on, like some monster leviathan spouting fire. It was as a dream of
enchantment to him, and soon stirred his brain wonderfully. With
singular vividness the eventful past of his pioneer life flitted
before his mental vision, and again he experienced the terrible
anxieties and thrills of horror and of heroic resolve connected with
the Indian uprising. And now his tears flow as he revisits in
imagination the lonely grave of his father on the far-off prairie.
Would the dear ones that survived the fearful outbreak be long safe?
Might they not soon need his aid once more? And the glowing future
for which he had so panted, would it be to him all he had fancied?
Would he pass safely the dangers his far-seeing mother had sketched?
Would he realize her ideal? And the kind missionary and the eccentric
money-lender, they had high expectations of what he should become.
Would he disappoint their hopes? Tom, wearied with thought, sought his
state-room, and fell asleep, dreaming that he was hearing, as on the
morning of his first visit to the fort, the bird-like notes of the
song that then floated through the open window, and that fairy Alice
looked out and said,--

"Don't forget me, Tom, while you are away."

Thus does divine and human love ever intertwine. How strange, how
unvarying the experience! Farewell, Tom! Farewell, Charlie! Good by,
Bub! Perhaps we may meet again.




THE LOOKOUT ISLAND CAMPERS

By WARREN L. ELDRED

Illustrated by Arthur O. Scott--Large 12mo--Cloth $1.50

[Illustration]

This is a story of active boys of fifteen or so. They are very fortunate
in the friendship of the principal of their school and his friend, an
athletic young doctor. Under the care of these two they go into camp on
an island well suited to the purpose, and within easy distance of a
thronged summer resort. A series of exciting ball games and athletic
contests with the boys at the hotel naturally follows, and the boys
display as many varieties of human nature as could their elders. The
author is a man who knows boys thoroughly, and by his work is known to a
very large number of them, and the whole atmosphere of the story is
merry, wholesome, and just what boys like.

"Mr. Eldred's book is almost certain to meet with a ready response from
young readers, for not only are the boys filled with life and vigor of a
true youthful and appreciable variety but their experiences are
entertaining in themselves and may perhaps give the young readers ideas
for summer plans of their own."--Chicago Tribune.

"This is a capital book for active boys, vigorous, wholesome and sane,
written by a man who knows boys and can give them the best kind of
vacation."--Defender, Boston.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Boston




THE BOY WITH THE U. S. SURVEY

By FRANCIS ROLT-WHEELER

First Volume of "U. S. Service Series"

Illustrations from photographs taken in work for U. S. Government

Large 12mo Cloth $1.50

[Illustration]

This is the first of a series of boys' books along entirely new lines.
Appealing to the boy's love of excitement, this series gives actual
experiences in the different branches of United States government work
little known to the general public. This story describes the thrilling
adventures of members of the U. S. Geological Survey, graphically woven
into a stirring narrative that both pleases and instructs. The author
enjoys an intimate acquaintance with the chiefs of the various bureaus in
Washington, and is able to obtain at first hand the material for the
books, and the finished manuscript is submitted to the chief of the bureau
for final approval to ensure accuracy of statement. While the United
States bureaus are not allowed to give their official endorsement to
books, yet they are all eager to afford every facility to the author to
take up their branch next. These are the very books that will develop boys
into well-informed and valuable citizens of these United States, alive to
the needs of conservation of the vast resources and energies of their
country.

"There is abundant charm and vigor in the narrative which is sure to
please the boy readers and will do much toward stimulating their
patriotism by making them alive to the needs of conservation of the vast
resources of their country."--Chicago News.

"This is a book one can heartily recommend for boys, and it has life
enough to suit the most eager of them."--Christian Register, Boston.

"You have made the stories much more interesting than the bare recital of
facts by our field men."--Geo. Otis Smith, Director U. S. Geological
Survey.

"You have faithfully portrayed many of the aspects of our field
work."--Alfred H. Brooks, Chief, Alaskan Division U. S. Geological
Survey.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Boston




WINNING HIS SHOULDER STRAPS

By NORMAN BRAINERD

First Volume of "Five Chums Series"

Illustrated by Frank Vining Smith

12mo Cloth $1.25

[Illustration]

A rousing story of life in a military school by one who thoroughly knows
all the features of such a school, with so much in its life that is so
entirely different from the ordinary boarding-school. Bob Anderson, the
hero, is a good friend to tie to, and each of his four particular friends
is a worthy companion, with well-sustained individuality. The dearest
honor to a student is to become an officer, and these coveted honors are
secured partly by competitive rank and partly by popular vote. Among all
kinds of dispositions, temperaments, and temptations, Bob has no easy road
to the coveted distinction. Athletics are plentifully featured, and every
boy, good, bad, and indifferent, is a natural fellow, who talks and acts
like a bright, up-to-date lad in real life.

"The story throughout is clean and wholesome, and will not fail to be
appreciated by any boy reader who has red blood in his veins."--Kennebec
Journal.

"There are school and athletic competitions, pranks and frolics and all in
all a book of which most boy readers will have no criticism to
make."--Springfield Republican.

"The story is told with a great deal of power and force, as well as of
sympathy and understanding of boy nature."--Buffalo News.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Boston



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CABIN ON THE PRAIRIE***


******* This file should be named 28870-8.txt or 28870-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/8/7/28870



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

