The Project Gutenberg EBook of Moon Glow, by G. L. Vandenburg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Moon Glow

Author: G. L. Vandenburg

Release Date: May 22, 2010 [EBook #32484]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOON GLOW ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              MOON GLOW

                         By G. L. VANDENBURG

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories November
1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


    _That first trip to the moon has been the subject of many stories.
    Mr. Vandenburg has come up with as novel a twist as we've ever read._

    _And it could happen._


The Ajax XX was the first American space craft to make a successful
landing on the moon. She had orbited the Earth's natural satellite for a
day and a half before making history. The reason for orbiting was
important. The Russians had been boasting for a number of years that
they would be first. Captain Junius Robb, U.S.A.F., had orders to
investigate before and after landing.

The moon's dark side was explored, due to the unknown hazards involved,
during the orbiting process. More thorough investigation was possible on
the moon's familiar side. The results seemed to be incontrovertible.
Captain Junius Robb and his crew of four were the first humans to tread
the ashes of the long dead heavenly body. The Russians, for all their
boasts, had never come near the place.

The Ajax XX stood tall and gaunt and mighty, framed against the
forbidding blackness of space. Captain Robb had maneuvered her down to
the middle of an immense crater, which the crew came to nickname "the
coliseum without seats."

Robb had orders not to leave the ship. Consequently, the crew of four
scrupulously chosen, well-integrated men split into two groups of two.
For three days they labored at gathering specimens, conducting countless
tests and piling up as much data as time and weight would allow. Captain
Robb kept them well reminded of the weight problem attached to the
return trip.

Near the end of the third day Captain Robb contacted his far flung crew
members over helmet intercom. He ordered them back to the Ajax XX for a
briefing session.

Soon the men entered the ship. They were hot, uncomfortable and
exhausted. Once back on Earth they could testify that there was nothing
romantic about a thirty-five-pound pressure suit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hamston, the rocket expert, summed it up: "With that damn bulb over his
skull a man is helpless to remove a single bead of perspiration. He
could easily develop into a raving maniac."

Robb held his meeting in the control room. "You have eight hours to
finish your work, gentlemen. We're blasting off at 0900."

"I beg your pardon, Captain," said Kingsley, the young man in charge of
radio operation, "but what about Washington? They haven't made contact
yet and I thought--"

"I talked with Washington an hour ago!"

A modest cheer of approval went up from the crew members.

"Well, why didn't you say so before!" said Anderson, the first officer.

Robb explained. "It seems _their_ equipment has been haywire for two
days, they haven't been able to get through."

"How do you like that!" cracked Farnsworth, the astrogator. "We're two
hundred and forty thousand miles off the Earth and our equipment works
fine. They have all the comforts of Earth down at headquarters and they
can't repair radio transmission for two days!"

The men laughed.

"Gentlemen," Robb continued, "every radio and TV network in the country
was hooked up to the chief's office in Washington. I not only talked to
General Lovett, I spoke to the whole damn country."

The men could not contain their excitement. The captain received a
verbal pelting of stored-up questions.

"Did you get word to my family, Captain?" asked Kingsley.

"I hope you told them we're physically sound, Captain," said Farnsworth.
"I have a fianc√©e that'll never forgive me if anything happens to me--"

"What's the reaction like around the country--"

"Have the Russians had anything to say yet--"

"Ha! I'll bet they're sore as hell--"

"Do you think the army would mind if I hand in my resignation?"
Kingsley's remark brought vigorous applause from the others.

Captain Robb held up his hand for silence. "Hold on! Hold on! First of
all, General Lovett has personally contacted relatives and told them
we're all physically and mentally sound. Secondly, you'd better get set
to receive the biggest damn welcome in history. The general says half
the nation has invaded Florida for the occasion."

"Tell them we're not coming back," snapped Kingsley, "until the Florida
Tourist Bureau gives us a cut."

"Kingsley, the President has declared a national holiday. We'll all be
able to write our own ticket."

"Yes," Anderson put in, "to hell with the Florida Tourist Bureau!"

Captain Robb said, "We'll be so sick of parades we'll wish we'd stayed
in this God forsaken place."

"Not me," boasted Farnsworth. "I'm ready for a parade in my honor any
old time. The sooner the better."

"Oh, and about the Russians," said Captain Robb, smiling. "There's been
nothing but a steady stream of 'no comment' out of the Kremlin since we
landed here."

"Right now," said Hamston, "it's probably high noon for every scientist
behind the iron curtain."

"I wonder how they plan to talk their way out of this one?" asked
Farnsworth.

"Gentlemen, I'd like to go on talking about the welcome we're going to
receive, but I think we'd better take first things first. Before there
can be a welcome we have to get back. And we still have work to do
before we start."

"What about souvenirs, Captain?" asked Farnsworth.

Robb pursed his lips thoughtfully, "Yes, I guess there is a matter of
souvenirs, isn't there."

The others detected a note of disturbance in the way the captain spoke.

Kingsley asked, "Is anything wrong, Captain?"

Robb laughed with a noticeable lack of enthusiasm. "Nothing is wrong,
Kingsley. The fact is we've taken on enough additional weight here to
give us some concern on the return trip." He paused to study the faces
of his men. They were disappointed. "But," he added emphatically, "I
seem to remember promising something about souvenirs--and I guess a man
can't travel five hundred thousand miles without something to show for
it. I'll get together with Hamston and work out something. But remember
that weight problem. First trouble we encounter on the return trip and a
souvenir will be our number one expendable."

The crew was more than happy with Robb's compromise. Robb went into a
huddle with Hamston, the rocket expert. When he emerged he informed the
crew that each man would be permitted one souvenir which must not exceed
two pounds. He allowed them four hours to find whatever they wanted. The
men got back into their pressure suits and left the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Junius Robb stood outside the Ajax XX. His eyes scanned the
great circular plain that stretched for fifty miles in all directions.
The distant jagged rises of the crater's rim resembled the lower half of
a gigantic bear trap.

The moon in all its splendor--wasn't there a song that went something
like that?--the moon in all its splendor, or lack of it was Robb's mute
opinion. The scientists, as usual, were right about the place. To all
intents and purposes the moon was as dead as The Roman Empire. True they
had found scattered vegetation; there were even two or three volcanoes
spewing carbonic acid, but they spewed it as though it were life's last
breath.

Nothing more. The fires of the moon had given way to soft lifeless
ashes.

Robb was glad he had allowed the men to look for souvenirs. After all,
it wasn't a hell of a lot to ask for. A man could cut press clippings
and collect medals and frame citations; and probably these things would
impress grandchildren someday. But it seemed that nothing would be quite
as effective as for a man to be able to produce something tangible, an
authentic piece of the moon itself.

Captain Robb had always tried to be a humble man. He recalled an
interview held by the three wire services a week before take-off. One of
the reporters had asked the obvious question, "Why do you want to go to
the moon?" He could have given all of the high sounding, aesthetic
reasons, but instead his answer was indirect, given with a modest smile.
"To get to the other side, I guess," he had told them.

Like the chicken crossing the road, that was how simple and
uncomplicated Robb's life had been. But now he stood, his feet spread
apart, beside his mighty ship, a quarter of a million miles away from
home. He was the first! And he could not fight back the feeling of pride
and accomplishment that welled in him. The word "first" in this instance
conjured up names like Balboa, Columbus, Peary, Magellan--and Junius
Robb.

The crew members deserved the hero's welcome they would receive. They
could have the banquets, parades and honorary degrees. But it was Junius
Robb who had commanded the flight. It would be Junius Robb's name for
the history books.

He wouldn't be needing any souvenirs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kingsley and Anderson were the first to return. They both carried small
leather bags. Inside the ship they revealed the contents to Robb. He
examined them carefully.

Kingsley had found an uncommonly large patch of brownish vegetation. He
had torn away a sizeable chunk and placed it in the bag. "Who knows?" he
shrugged. "I might be able to cultivate it."

"Or let it play the lead in a science fiction movie," snapped Anderson.

The first officer's bag contained a piece of one of the smaller craters.
It had no immediately discernable value. It was Anderson's intention to
polish it up and put some kind of a metal plaque on it.

Four more hours went by and there was no sign of Farnsworth or Hamston.
Robb began to worry. He'd never forgive himself if anything happened to
either of the two men. He waited another half hour, then ordered Kinsley
and Anderson to put on their pressure suits and go look for the two
missing crew members.

The search was avoided as Farnsworth entered the ship dragging Hamston
behind him.

"What happened!" yelled Robb.

Farnsworth began the job of getting out of his pressure suit. "I don't
know. Hamston's sick as a dog. I checked every inch of his suit and
couldn't find anything out of order."

Robb bent over the prone rocket expert. Hamston looked up at him with
half-opened eyes and an insipid grin on his face. He mumbled something
about "a fine state of affairs."

They removed Hamston's suit and placed his limp frame on a bunk. Robb
examined him for forty minutes.

He reached the curious conclusion that Hamston was as fit as a fiddle.

The rocket expert fell asleep. Robb and the rest of the crew prepared to
blast off.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ajax XX thrust itself through space, halfway back to its home
planet.

The excitement of her crew members grew with every passing second. In
his concern over Hamston, Farnsworth had forgotten about his souvenir.
He now opened his bag and displayed it before the others.

"What is it?" asked Kingsley.

"Dust!" was Farnsworth's proud reply.

"What the hell you going to do with dust?"

"Maybe you don't know it but this is going to be the most valuable dust
on the face of the Earth! Do you realize what I can get for an ounce of
this stuff?"

"What's anybody want to buy dust for?"

"Souvenirs, man, souvenirs!"

Farnsworth asked to see what Kingsley and Anderson had picked up. The
two men obliged. For the next hour the three men and Robb discussed the
mementoes and their possible uses on Earth.

Then Anderson said, "I sure wouldn't turn down about a gallon of good
Kentucky whiskey right now!"

Robb laughed. "We did enough sweating on the way. You wouldn't want to
sweat out the trip back on a belly full of booze."

"That may be a better idea than you think it is, Captain."

The four men turned to find Hamston sitting up on his bunk.

"Hamston!" Robb exclaimed, "how do you feel?"

"Terrible."

"What happened to you?" asked Kingsley.

Hamston stared at each man individually. He took a deep breath and his
cheeks puffed up as he let it out slowly. "Well, I guess you'd better
know now."

Robb frowned. "What do you mean?"

"Farnsworth and I separated after we got about four miles from the ship.
I thought I saw something that looked like a cave. I figured I might
find something interesting there to take back with me. So I told
Farnsworth I'd keep radio contact with him and off I went."

"Did you find a cave?" Robb wanted to know.

"No, it was just a big indentation in the wall of the crater. I threw
some light on it and found it to be ten or fifteen feet deep." He paused
as though not sure of what to say next.

"So?"

"So that's where I found my souvenir."

"Well, let's see it!" said Anderson.

Hamston opened his leather bag. The object he removed rendered the crew
weak in the knees. He said, "We can have that drink, Anderson, but I
don't think we'll enjoy it."

He poured them each a shot from a half-filled bottle of Vodka.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Moon Glow, by G. L. Vandenburg

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOON GLOW ***

***** This file should be named 32484-8.txt or 32484-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/8/32484/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
