The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 108,
June 8, 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 108, June 8, 1895

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis Burnand

Release Date: October 9, 2012 [EBook #40990]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, JUNE 8, 1895 ***




Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Malcolm Farmer,
Ernest Schaal. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net









PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.
VOL. 108.
JUNE 8, 1895.




                          ROBERT ON THE TEMS.

Me and sum of the Gents of the Lundon County Counsel, as they calls
theirselves, has had sum considerable differences of opinion lately, but
I don't suppose as it will cum to much. It seems as sum on em has got
theirselves elected into the Tems Conserwancy Gents, and nothink as is
dun quite sattisfys em unless they has the best places on bord the
crack steamers as takes em either up the River or Down the River, as the
case may be. In course they all wants the werry best heatables and
drinkables, and plenty on em; but if the water appens to be jest a
little ruff, the one thing as they all scrambles for is plenty to heat
and plenty to drink, and a nice quiet seat in the Saloon all the way
home.

[Illustration]

I herd tell the other day as how as some of the Tems Conserwancy Gents
had a reglar quarrel with sum of the County Counsel Gents, all becoz of
the diffrence that sum on em wants to make in the way in which things is
conducted on bord when agoing on their way home. It most suttenly must
make a great diffrence weather it is a nice, brillyant, sunny day, and
all happy on bord, or weather it is a dull, dark, rainy day, and not
room enuff for harf the cumpany.

I don't find as how as the too partys in the Corporation agrees with one
another more than they used to when they used to quarrel so much about
everythink. In fack they seems jist as much opposed to each other as
ever, and I, for my part, most truly hopes as how as they will continue
in the same noble spirit, and then they will hate each other with the
same cordial hatred as so distinguished them in days gone by.

I don't know a greater treat myself than spending a nour or too with the
County Counsellers at Charing Cross. They can lay the stingers about in
splendid style, and both sides of the question, much alike in force, and
werry much alike in quolity. But the werry finist sight of all I shoud
think wood be to see a thorowly good set to between a picked set of the
Tems Conserwancy and another of the County Counsellers. From what I
hears of the former I shoud think their chance would be grand indeed,
and from what I have herd of their reckless perseverance I should think
their loss almost incredible. The Tems is the river for me, and long may
it remain so!

                                                             ROBERT.

                               * * * * *

                          ROUNDABOUT READINGS.

Terrible things have been happening in Newcastle. If any one doubts this
statement, let him read the following extract from one of the local
papers. "Though it is a good while," observes a leader-writer, "since it
could be said with justice that the trade of the country was advancing
by leaps and bounds, the observation may with absolute accuracy be made
with respect to our Newcastle rates. They have stolen along with woollen
feet, and are now about to strike with iron hands."

                                 * * *

I bow to the ground in awe-struck admiration before this picture
of rates stealing along on woollen feet and raising iron hands for a
deadly blow at the unfortunate ratepayers of Newcastle. There is
something fell and savage in the mere contemplation of it. Prose is
quite inadequate to it; it demands rhyme, and must have it:--

      Consider Newcastle, its pitiful case,
        Where the rates have a habit of stealing.
      'Tis a way they are prone to in many a place,
        And they do it without any feeling.

      They move without noise, and they thus get the pull,
        Like a cab with a new rubber tyre on;
      For their feet, it is said, are a compound of wool,
        Though the hands that they strike with are iron.

      The vision appals me, one glimpse is enough;
        With terror my bosom is heaving.
      Yet I venture the hint--do not treat it as stuff--
        That steel were more suited for thieving.

                                 * * *

Something always appears to be wrong with the streets of Bristol. I had
to notice the melancholy case of Christmas Street last week. The
epidemic has now extended to Old Market Street. Here the pitching is so
dangerous that horses fall and break their legs, and ladies die from
falls on Easter Mondays. A correspondent who calls attention to this
matter says that "it is quite annoying on a busy day to have to ask
customers two, three, or even four times what they require." I scarcely
see what this has to do with the pavement, but personally I have always
found it more than annoying to be asked four times as much as I require,
even when my requirements are small, as they usually are. It is
gratifying to find that, in Old Market Street, at any rate, the
shopkeeper who asks has an equal share of annoyance.

                                 * * *

Then again, Conduit Place, Lower Ashley Road, is not only badly
lighted, but its name is practically unknown. "Even shopkeepers in the
neighbourhood and policemen on the beat do not seem to know of it, and
sometimes lead people astray in consequence." This, however, is not to
be wondered at, as "another difficulty is the numbering of the houses;
although only about thirty in the road, they are divided into five
terraces with different sets of numbers, which causes endless
confusion."

                                 * * *

      Increase not, wanderer, the policeman's load;
      Ask not the site of Lower Ashley Road.
      Inquire not eagerly for Conduit Place,
      But start unasking on thy terraced chase.
      These places to policemen are unknown,
      So shall the pride of finding be thine own.
      Go forth, go forth, itinerary pundit,
      And find the place that takes its name from Conduit.
      Thy journey, after many a turn and twist'll
      Land thee at Lower Ashley Road in Bristol.
      Then pause, and, having raised a thankful voice,
      Take 'midst five terraces thy doubtful choice;
      And, envied by policemen on their beats,
      Return, a lexicon of Bristol streets.

                                 * * *

But the badness of the streets and the ignorance of policemen as to
their whereabout is nothing to the annoyance caused by the Salvation
Army bands near St. Clement's Church in Newfoundland Road. "On Ascension
Day," the Vicar writes, "our service was completely stopped for several
minutes, as the preacher, who had a bad cold, was unable to shout above
the din of the passing drum." I shudder to imagine what would have been
the plight of the congregation if the preacher had been free from cold,
and capable of shouting down a drum.

                                 * * *

Rowing and cricket are more closely connected than many people suppose.
In an account of the Oxford eight-oared bumping races, I read that "New
College started at a tremendous bat." This of course accounts for the
bawling on the bank by which these races are always accompanied. Further
on it is stated that "New College finished at 40, all out"--which seems
rather a small score.

                                 * * *

I commend the brevity of the Mayor of Cambridge, Mr. HYDE HILLS, who,
being obviously above Hyde Park, does not condescend to the verbosity of
the spouters who on Sundays congregate in that locality. The other day
Mr. HYDE HILLS was elected to be an Alderman, and all he said was, "I
thank you." This is _optimi exempli_, especially for Aldermen.

                                 * * *

Lately I came across the following touching appeal of an impecunious son
to his father:--

      Sir,--I have piles of bills,
      Regular miles of bills;
        My banking account's in a hash.
      All on the debtor side,
      Nought on the better side;
        The balance you'd hardly call "cash."

      'Tis terrible when you're reduced thus to penury,
        Even if _that's_ nothing new.
      Hope! Can I dream of it?
      Yes, there's a gleam of it;
        My quarter's allowance is due!

                                 * * *

At the Bigg Market in Newcastle was recently held what a local paper
describes as "a demnostration in favour of temperance reform."
"Demnostration" is a delightful word. It seems to express in the most
compact form enthusiasm and strong language.

                               * * * * *

A QUESTION OF POLICE.--A few days since Liverpool set another lesson to
London. No doubt with the consent of the Liverpudlians (inclusive of
"the dangerous classes"), the local police force had a grand field-day.
To quote our excellent contemporary, the _Courier_, "those who witnessed
the police's steady march through the streets in three battalions, and
their effectively-performed manoeuvres in Sefton Park, would hardly
realise what the turn-out meant to most of the men. They were on duty
through the night, and had very little rest before they had to parade
for inspection (with the march-out and review), and the weather being
warm, the display involved fatigue, so that the refreshments provided
were very welcome." Yes, and no doubt well deserved. But why should
London wait? Why should not we have something of the same kind? We might
have a grand Police Review in Hyde Park. All that would be necessary
would be to arrange that the metropolitan thieves should keep the
ground!

                                 * * *

PROVERBIAL PARLIAMENTARY ECONOMY, OR SHORT COMMONS FOR UPPER
HOUSE.--Don't spare the Black Rod, and then you won't have to spoil the
Upper-Housemaid.

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: "WHAT A KNIGHT WE'RE HAVING!"

_David Garrick._ "CONGRATULATE YOU, SIR HENRY! IN THE NAME OF THE
PROFESSION! 'MAY YOU LIVE LONG, AND PROSPER!'"]

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: HINTS FOR THE PARK.

DON'T PUT YOUR HORSE OUT OF THE WALK UNLESS YOU CAN REALLY RIDE.]

                               * * * * *

                     NOTES FROM A PATIENT'S DIARY.

    ["Music is a serious therapeutic agent, which exercises a
    genuine and considerable influence over bodily functions."--_The
    Lancet._]

_Monday._--Feel rather out of sorts, slight touch of influenza, I fancy.
Send round for Doctor. He shakes his head gravely, and produces
stethoscope. I protest that there's nothing wrong with my lungs, and
this is, therefore, unnecessary. But he explains that he treats all his
patients by music nowadays; supposed stethoscope turns out to be a
cornet, on which he performs selections from _Il Trovatore_ for my
benefit. Asks me if I feel better, and in order to get rid of him I
pretend that I do. Later on in the day a small musical-box arrives,
labelled "to be taken twice a day." Find it only plays one tune out of
_Rigoletto_. Pitch it out of window.

_Tuesday._--No better. Consult another doctor, who's just taken his
degree (in music) at Oxford, and is supposed to be very clever. He feels
my pulse, and looks solemn. Then he asks if I've been giving way to
Italian opera lately, and appears coldly sceptical when I explain that I
have been taking it by medical advice. Prescribes essence of WAGNER, to
be taken at short intervals. Begin by attending a RICHTER concert. Dr.
RICHTER'S practice is said to be enormous, and every part of St. James's
Hall is thronged by his patients.

_Wednesday._--Better. Receive a large number of patent medicine
circulars--this kind of thing: "Try our Indigestion Waltzes! Warranted
to cure. All headache, giddiness and faintness removed at first time of
hearing." Here's another: "Dentists superseded! All sufferers from
Toothache should attend Herr BOSKOWSKY'S course of Dental Piano
Recitals. Worth a guinea a stall." I also learn that the Hirsutine
Symphony cures baldness, and that the Pink Bavarian Band may be engaged
to play "Slumber-Songs" to sufferers from insomnia.

_Thursday._--Am aroused by five barrel-organs performing simultaneously
under my next-door neighbour's window. Send a note round suggesting they
should be dispersed. Answer "Sorry to cause annoyance, but our youngest
child is suffering from chickenpox, and has been ordered street-music
every three hours." Go out to buy an air-gun. Later in the day,
happening to take up the _Lancet_ at the Club, I find in it a long
article on "The treatment of pleurisy by BEETHOVEN'S Fifth Symphony in C
Minor."

_Friday._--Two seedy-looking men suddenly appear in the drawing-room
after dinner to-night. Discover that they are "The Brothers TITTLEBAT"
from the Abracadabra Music Hall, and that my wife has engaged them, by
her doctor's orders, to sing comic songs every evening for a fortnight,
in order to cure the depression of spirits from which she believes
herself to be suffering. "The Brothers TITTLEBAT" seem to be suffering
themselves from elevation of spirits--gin, to judge by the smell; kick
them out, and decide to emigrate to-morrow.

                               * * * * *

                           LA DIVA AT DALY'S.

_Gismonda_ is poor stuff. The selection was a mistake. Lucky man SARDOU
to have SARA for heroine. Great is SARDOU and SARA is his profit!
Splendid as ever, but genius wasted on _Gismonda_. She will be seen at
her best in other dramas. Wonderful _artiste!_

Yes, _artiste jusqu'au bout des ongles_, but why give us these real good
tips, painted red? If it were in English, SARA might make some joke
about her fingers being "reddy" for the assassination of the villain.
This explanation does not exist in French. Probably it was the fashion
in the time of _Gismonda_.

Will any dramatist give SARA an entirely new part in which she will not
be compelled to purr, swear (like a cat, not a trooper), scratch,
shriek, tumble on settees, clutch curtains, wrestle with cushions, and
so forth?

Why, on first night, revive old custom of handing up baskets of flowers,
per orchestra, to the heroine of the play and the Star of the Night? Why
keep the audience waiting so long between each Act? We are not in Paris,
and when we have too much "song," or play, we can't get any "supper."

                               * * * * *

NOTE (_by our City Man_).--Excellent notion for a hot June--"the _Chili_
Loan." It will be a hot favourite: to be taken up warmly. _Mem._ Invest
"cool thousand" in the Chili Loan.

                               * * * * *

                          THE SCARLET PARASOL.

      SCENE III.--_The Hall. A quarter to Three in the afternoon._

_Muriel_ (_to_ ALAN, _who is just taking his hat_). Oh! _May_ I speak to
you one moment, Master ROY?

_Alan._ Pray do, dear Miss VANE. I am just going for a stroll by
myself--to--to develope an idea I've got.

_Muriel._ If you should happen to be going for a secret drive along the
high road with VIOLA, in a dog-cart from JOHNSTONE'S, _would_ you be so
kind as to give her this? (_Hands scarlet parasol._) She forgot it. And
don't let her leave it anywhere. You see her initials are carved round
it. And she is _always_ losing things. Please be very careful!

                                                         [_She smiles._

_Alan._ What on earth can have given you such an extraordinary idea,
Miss VANE?

                                                       [_Takes parasol._

_Muriel._ Well, a sort of coach-building, livery-stable person, from
JOHNSTONE'S, is engaged to JANE, the housemaid. He came to see her
to-day.... She has been ill, poor thing!

_Alan._ How very distressing!

_Muriel._ VIOLA _said_ she was going to visit cottages. However, in
_case_ you _should_ meet--one never knows--you'll give her the sunshade.

_Alan._ You may depend upon it, Miss VANE.

    _In the Dog-cart._ ALAN _is driving very leisurely, and_ VIOLA
    _trying to hide under her parasol_.

_Alan._ That's a perfectly delicious hat of yours!

_Viola._ I am so glad you like it! This is a very nice dog-cart, and
this is a pretty lane to drive in, so cool and green.

                                              [_A pony-carriage passes._

_Viola_ (_starting violently_). Good heavens! There are the clergyman
and his wife.

                                          [_She bows, blushing crimson._

_Alan._ Why are you agitated, Mrs. TRAVERS? They look very gentle and
harmless.

_Viola._ Gentle and harmless! If they tell ALBERT?

_Alan._ Does he disapprove of the clergy taking exercise in the open
air?

_Viola_ (_pettishly_). Of course not. How absurd!

                                                           [_A silence._

_Alan._ Shall we get out presently, and sit in one of these nice fields,
and make daisy-chains? There are daisies in fields, I know--though I
_am_ rather urban.

_Viola._ Oh, yes; and cowslips!

_Alan._ You ought to give a cowslip-ball, Mrs. TRAVERS. It would be
charming. May I come?

_Viola._ If you're old enough by then!

_Alan._ Oh, I'm never going to be old enough.

_Viola._ Really not?

_Alan_ (_candidly_). It's a great thing to have settled on one's pose,
Mrs. TRAVERS; and one can't be always changing--it's so much trouble!

                            _In the Field._

_Viola_ (_trying to enjoy herself_). This is lovely! So cool! and the
sky so--so blue!

_Alan._ You have a perfect passion for scenery! (_He picks some flowers,
and gives them to her._) I have so many things I want to tell you----

_Viola._ About yourself?

_Alan._ No, about you. Things you don't know----

_Viola_ (_starting_). Oh! Is that someone we know?

_Alan._ I _hope_ you wouldn't know a man who wears such a hat as that in
the country!

_Viola._ It's all right--I _don't_ know him.

                                                           [_Sits down._

_Alan_ (_trying to recover the thread_). About yourself--your eyes, for
instance. Has anyone ever told you how annihilating they are?

_Viola._ I'm very glad you like them, Master ROY; but we really _must_
go now, Dr. ROBERTS will be there to tea, and they will think it odd----

_Alan_ (_ironically_). Oh, it would be terrible to miss Dr.
ROBERTS--quite terrible!

          [_Follows her, thinking the expedition rather a failure. As he
            helps her into the dog-cart, she knocks her ankle very
            slightly._

_Viola._ Oh! Oh! I've broken my ankle! I shan't be able to walk home! It
will all be found out! Oh, _why_ did we do this!

                                                   [_She begins to cry._

_Alan_ (_to himself_). Why indeed! (_To_ VIOLA.) Poor dear child, how
absolutely dreadful! But, if Dr. ROBERTS is there it will be all right.
He can set it.

_Viola._ Set it! How can you talk in that heartless way! _Why_ did you
make me come for this drive?

_Alan_ (_apologetically_). I really thought you seemed as if you'd like
to! Come, I can't allow you to cry.

             [_Tries to dry her eyes. She moves away. He drops his whip
               and has to get out and pick it up. They drive back very
               quickly and in entire silence, save for a few groans
               from_ VIOLA.

_Viola._ Well, I suppose I must try to hobble home. Yes, I'm a little
better. Do take the horrid dog-cart away! It's an absurd one--brown and
ridiculous. _Do_ I look as if I'd been crying--much?

_Alan_ (_coldly but evasively_). You look perfectly charming.

_Viola._ Oh! _take_ that buttercup out of your coat! Someone might
suspect!----

[Illustration: At the garden gate.]

_Muriel_ (_meeting_ VIOLA _at the garden gate_). Oh, VIOLA, such
wonderful things have been happening! Quick--before we see anyone else.
Dr. ROBERTS has been here. Well, he proposed to me! and I accepted him
like a girl in a book! You see, you were out.

_Viola._ All right. Oh, MURIEL, I am so ill, and so anxious. I have such
a toothache, I can hardly walk. I hurt my foot, reading to a poor woman
in a cottage.

_Muriel._ Some tea will cure you. But, VIOLA, will you and ALBERT be
nice about my engagement?

_Viola._ The truth is I had such a dull, wretched, idiotic drive with
ALAN ROY, that I can't be nice about anything.

_Muriel._ Will you consult VALENTINE? Dr. ROBERTS, you know?

_Viola._ How can you go and get engaged to people called VALENTINE!

    _At Dinner. Everyone very cheery, except_ CLAUDE MIGNON, _who
    looks depressed, and_ Mrs. AVERIDGE, _who is unnoticed_.

_Albert_ (_serving soup_). What _is_ that ring?

_Viola._ Oh, nothing.

_Servant._ Please, Sir, it's only JOHNSTONE has sent misses's parasol,
that was left in the cart!

_Albert._ This is some mistake! You didn't drive to-day, VIOLA?

_Muriel_ (_apart to_ ALAN). Shall I betray you? (_To_ ALBERT.) The fact
is Master ROY went out alone, to develop an idea; and _I_ lent him
VIOLA'S parasol, because he was afraid of getting sunburnt.

                                                     [_Everyone laughs._

_Alan._ One _has_ to be so careful. Freckles run dreadfully in my
family. I had them once, and a relapse is _most_ dangerous!

                            _After Dinner._

_Viola._ Darling MURIEL! I congratulate you and VALENTINE. VALENTINE is
such a pretty name! How sweet you were! I shall never have another
secret!

_Muriel._ And shall you tell ALBERT all about it?

_Viola._ Perhaps--to-morrow!

_Claude Mignon_ (_to_ ALAN). I _hate_ a house where a girl is engaged!
I'm going away to-morrow.

_Alan._ So am I.

_Claude Mignon._ Rather a clumsy-looking creature--the old Doctor?

_Alan._ Oh, no! Very distinguished!

_Muriel_ (_to_ ALAN, _in a low voice_). I _told_ you not to leave the
parasol.

_Alan._ You did, dear Miss VANE. It was dear of you.

_Muriel._ And did you develope your idea?

_Alan._ Well--no. Somehow, it didn't quite come off.

                                THE END.

                               * * * * *

BYE-BYE TO DAUDET.--We could not stand the presence of two lions in
London; so, when NASRULLA KHAN appeared on the scene, ALPHONSE DAUDET
made his exit. Our, "_Beau-bel Poète_" sends us his jingle:--

              DAUDET _est parti!_
              Good-bye my hearty!
      "_Fortiter in re, suaviter in modo,_"
      _Bon soir_ DAUDET! "_allez faire Dodo!_"

                                 * * *

AN INTERREGNUM OF BRUTALITY.--The _Times_ last week announced that

    "Applications for the vacant Chair of Humanity in the University
    of Edinburgh should be lodged not later than Saturday, June 29."

Alas! Poor Humanity! It may be news to many that the Chair of Humanity
is in the possession of the Northern University. Of course a very large
arm-chair, with arms to embrace all mankind. And a very easy chair.
Whoever sits in it is only a Professor, and what is mere profession
without practice?

                               * * * * *

                            OPERATIC NOTES.

_Tuesday._--Madame MELBA as _Juliette!_ Bless her heart, she must have
had a very large one, being a decidedly fine girl for her age, which I
believe was fifteen; while _Romeo_ was about nineteen, or thereabouts.
Mons. ALVAREZ, it is needless to add, looked quite "thereabouts." Both
singing and acting in first-rate style. _Jupiter-Plançon_, converted,
appears as _Frère Laurent_, which, sounding like "Law-wrong," is a name
rather descriptive of this worthy Friar's somewhat underhand proceedings
_Friar Law-wrong-Plain-song_ excellent. Full house night before the
Derby. If omens go for anything, the gentleman who was making a book in
the lobby, and who overheard some one speak of the opera as _Rosebery
and Juliette_, might have made a small fortune. The slip was a tip.

Some people say, "Why orchestra in 'well' below stage?" But Sir
DRURIOLANUS, with experience of general advantage to sound and sight,
says, "Shan't touch 'em. 'Leave well alone' is my motto." Exit Sir D.
merrily.

[Illustration]

_Saturday._--Strange case of _Rigoletto & Co._--"Co." being MELBA at her
best, BAUERMEISTER and clever JULIA RAVOGLI, with DE LUCIA as the Gay
Dook, ANCONA as the Fool, suggestive of the PAGLIACCI mummer with a
court appointment. "House full." MAUREL is coming. To _Falstaff_ and
_Don Giovani_ he will give a "high Maurel tone."

                               * * * * *

               SPORT, SPECULATION, AND COUNSEL'S OPINION.

So many letters have reached me during the past week begging for my
opinion upon the legality of what may be termed sporting financial
speculation, that I scarcely apologise for asking the hospitality of the
columns of the leading law paper to give my response. No doubt the
inquiry has to some extent been fostered by the report that I was seen
taking part in the hippodromatic revels of the Derby Day. It is true
that I certainly visited Epsom on the occasion in question; but only in
a semi-official capacity. I have the honour to be consulting assessor of
the Diamond Mine Salting Syndicate, Limited, and in that desirable
position have frequently attended the meetings of the directors on
occasions, so to speak, outside the Board-room. It is true that my
experience as one learned in the law is seldom required at such seasons,
still the directors, as fiduciaries, are to be applauded for neglecting
no opportunity of availing themselves of my services.

Having satisfactorily explained how it came that I was on the Downs
when, by a not unnatural coincidence, the Derby was decided, I proceed
to consider the question that has been propounded to me. Is sporting
speculative finance illegal? It is not a matter that can be decided
off-hand. One must be careful not to interfere with the policy of trade,
and do nothing to impede the development of honest industry. I am asked
by a correspondent, who dates "From Sheffield," if there is anything
undignified in his appearing as a "bookie" in a pink velvet coat, a
yellow slouch hat, with blue feathers, and black leather knickerbockers.
I can see no objection to a tradesman wearing any costume he determines
to select. It would perhaps be as well not to attempt to disguise his
features, as the operation might savour of secrecy, the chief element of
fraud. This limitation of course does not apply to an auctioneer, who,
having his name and address displayed on a board hanging on the rostrum
he occupies, can legally carry on his business, if it so pleases him, in
a false nose, a comic wig, and a pair of green spectacles.

But really, a consideration of the costume of the "bookie" merely
reaches the fringe of the subject. The real point at issue is this--Is
betting legal or illegal? It is hard to say. That a bet made on the
racecourse is recoverable is questionable. Suppose that A is prepared to
give odds against _The Earl's Choice_ (the favourite, quoted officially
at 2 to 1) at the rate of five shillings against one thousand pounds
sterling. Presume that B agrees to the wager and _The Earl's Choice_
wins. B naturally asks for the immediate payment by A of one thousand
pounds sterling. A declines. Has B any remedy against A? I am afraid
that the Court (although allowing costs on the higher scale) would not
assist the plaintiff in making good his claim. However, it would be
possible for B to represent to the other side that the conduct of A was
of a character warranting chronic detention in a lunatic asylum. If this
suggestion were adopted with the necessary discretion, I have no doubt
that a compromise satisfactory to B would eventually be the outcome of
the negotiations.

However, although I am a little uncertain about other bets, I have no
doubt in my own mind that coach sweepstakes under certain circumstances
should be discouraged. I do not wish to rely upon case law, but would
rather appeal to that honest, manly feeling that is (so I have been
given to understand) the birthright of every Englishman. When all Nature
is smiling, and man (smoking a three-shilling cigar) is at rest, why
trouble about mounts and starters and blanks?

I have in my mind at this moment the drawing of a certain sweepstakes.
An eminent counsel (I will not mention his name), was present and drew a
blank. On his behalf I appeal for a revision, a reversal of judgment. Do
not let there be a mixture of the glories of Nature with the ups and
down of sporting speculative practice. Let those who took part in that
sweep--winners and losers alike--return their stakes. I will hold them
on the general behalf. Then when I have received the cash as trustee I
will find out that eminent counsel and place the money in his hands. I
have nothing more to add, save to set forth as a guarantee of good faith
my signature warranted by my address.

                                               A. BRIEFLESS, JUNIOR.

    _Pump-handle Court, June_ 1, 1895.

                               * * * * *

                  OH, MY PROPHETIC SOUL, MY PUNCHIUS!

    ["_Punch_ made a great hit" (in his last Cartoon "A Doubtful
    Stayer"), "and will probably take credit to himself for having
    been one of the very few who 'tipped' _Sir Visto_ for the
    Derby."--_Leeds Mercury._]

      Thanks, Mercury, thanks! Acclaim from all ranks
        Declares _Mr. Punch_ is _the_ prophet to follow.
      The Public rejoices, and Mercury voices
        The popular praise due to Punchius Apollo.
      The oracular god, with a genial nod,
        Admits that he knew it, foresaw it, and _said_ it!
      But oh, deary, deary! His pen it would weary
        If for all his successful straight tips he "took credit."
      At Delphi of old they _sometimes_ hit the gold;
        _Punch's_ oracles nought to equivocal mist owe.
      No riddle or rebus contents the new Phoebus,
        So all wise men twigged when he tipped 'em _Sir Visto!_

                               * * * * *

                          OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

[Illustration]

The particular Baronitess to whom the Baron handed over _The Holy
Estate_ (a novel in three volumes, by two authors, W. H. WILKINS and
FRANK THATCHER, published by HUTCHINSON & CO.), says that in explanation
it is called by its authors "a study in morals," but where the morals
come in or come out it would be difficult to say. Apparently, in the
majority of the characters, there is a singular lack of any virtuous
quality. A young innocent girl marries a gay soldier and goes out to
India. Here she finds herself placed in a land where principles are
decidedly at a discount. Her husband turns out, to put it mildly, a
blackguard (with a big, big "B"), and his friends are of the same
fascinating type. In a typical, melodramatic, "Adelphi villain," there
is something almost wholesome as compared with the modern bad man of
"_Yellow-Book_" fiction, who is simply revolting. [By the way,
interpolates the Baron, the latest _Yellow Book_ is comparatively quite
decorous and without an Aubrey-Beardsley illustration!!] Of course, the
hero and heroine of _The Holy Estate_ have to pass through the fiery
ordeal of Indian Society; how they come out of it the reader may
discover. But as pessimism is the artistic order of the day, they are
not allowed to finish well and "live happy ever afterwards." My
Baronitess adds, with a frown, "It cannot be called pleasant reading,
nor is there in it any sign of the genius of a DAUDET or a ZOLA which
might be accepted as, in some sort, a literary excuse for its being
brought into existence."

                                   (Signed) THE BARON DE BOOK-WORMS.

                               * * * * *

                           As Broad as Long.

_First Critic._  Shortness now rules in Novel and in Song,
                   Which, like men's clothes, are cut and made to order.

_Second Critic._ It may be Tale and Lay are now less long,
                   But they make up for it by growing broader.

                                 * * *

SPORTING PARADOX.--ROSEBERY was more of a "favourite" when he was an
"outsider." Perhaps, like his _Sir Visto_, when an outsider again--which
he seems likely soon to be--he will be safer to back for a "place," if
not for an absolute win.

                                 * * *

BEST SOLUTION OF MINISTERIAL DIFFICULTIES.--_Dis_solution.

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: A FORTIORI.

_Mamma._ "NOT ASLEEP YET, GEORGE?"

_George._ "NO; I CAN'T GET TO SLEEP BECAUSE JACK SAYS HE'S GOT CRUMBS IN
HIS BED. HE COULDN'T MAKE MORE FUSS IF IT WAS THE WHOLE LOAF!"]

                               * * * * *

                                DAUDET!

   (_An old Comic Song re-sung for the benefit of a French Critic._)

    ["As for English women, their looks and their dress, the less
    said the better. They have, in M. DAUDET'S opinion, neither
    beauty nor taste."--_The Times' Correspondent in Paris._]

                           AIR--"_Doo-dah!_"

      Oh, ALPHONSE! Gallantry befits your race!
                              DAUDET! DAUDET!
      Can you look hereafter in an Englishwoman's face,
                              DAUDET? DAUDET-say?
          You must have snoozed all night,
            You must have blinked all day;
      Have been blind--_pro tempore_--to Beauty's light,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!

      Is every Englishwoman then a Grundy or a Gamp,
                              DAUDET? DAUDET?
      Did you play Diogenes--without his lamp--
                              DAUDET? DAUDET-say?
          Have you joined the pessimist churls
            Who of nothing good can say,
      That you slight our women and insult our girls,
                              DAUDET? DAUDET-say?

      Oh, Dan seems empty and Beersheba bare,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET!
      And there's nothing tasteful, and there's no one fair,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!
          To the saffron skin of France
            English rose-tints must give way?
      At our British Beauties _did_ you get a glance,
                              DAUDET? DAUDET-say?

      You laud male Britons, whilst you pour dispraise--
                              DAUDET! DAUDET!--
      On our girls and matrons! 'Tis a travellers' craze,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!
          The Frank abroad--is frank,--
            From the _belles_ of France away,
      He is doubtless home-sick, but he need not turn "crank."
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!

      The less said the better? Well, _that's_ true, no doubt,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET!
      But the little that you _have_ said is all sneer and flout,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!
          The maids of France are fair!--
            Are the men _fair_ too? Ah! nay.
      Not if _you_'re a specimen, my debonair
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!

      Neither taste nor beauty? Oh! you _must_ have been bad,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET!
      The _mal de mer_ all the time you must have had,
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!
          The jaundice worked its will
            Upon you all the way!
      Try again--after swallowing a big blue pill--
                              DAUDET! DAUDET-say!

                               * * * * *

                             Sands and Sea.

            (_By a Harrow Boy who was "ploughed" at Exam._)

"Ploughing the sands" has been shown, in a letter to the _Times_, to be,
in some cases, a productive operation. If the sands are well ploughed,
and well sown, then may a fine crop be expected. When "Ploughing the
sands" is no longer remunerative, then let all hands be summoned aboard,
and the Government vessel in search of General Election Island may
"Plough the sea," and come safely into port. What is successful
"ploughing" to them will be "harrowing" to the Opposition.

                               * * * * *

"O SUCH A DAY WAS NEVER SEEN!"--Mr. Justice DAY is always a bright,
never a dull DAY. His judicial utterances are like the sea around the
Isle of Man, clear and profound. Rarely does he miss a good point; yet
so it was the other day when, in a trial of "_Legge_ v." a heap of
people (not involving any question of "Legge bail"), Mr. Justice DAY
observed, "I find now very high rank held by doctors in the Army. There
are Captain-surgeons, Colonel-surgeons, and I am not sure there are not
Generals. (_Laughter._)" "Not sure," Mr. Justice! Why 'tis as clear as
Day! There is another and a higher grade, viz., "General-Practitioner."

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: HARCOURT THE HEADSMAN.]

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: 'HOPE YOU BACKED THE WINNER?'

"MY DEAR FELLOW, ONLY TOO DELIGHTED. BUT YOU NEVER _TOLD_ ME!"]

                               * * * * *

A REALLY BIG PURCHASE BY A PRIVATE INDIVIDUAL, AT A VERY MODERATE
FIGURE.--For 260 guineas Mr. W. AGNEW purchased "_Lambeth Palace--in the
distance_." It is no "distance" to speak of, as twopence more will take
the purchaser by steam-boat from almost any landing-stage across the
river to Lambeth. It should perhaps be added, so as not to frighten the
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, that in the purchase were included "_Old
Westminster Bridge (a view of), with State Barges and Boats_." The whole
Thames-water-colour having been painted in oil by SCOTT. This lot, by
Great SCOTT, went as above-mentioned.

                                 * * *

MUSICAL EXERCISE FOR BICYCLISTS.--Try WAGNER'S "'CYCLE."

                                 * * *

"WANTS TO KNOW."--"Dear Sir,--I saw a paragraph in the _Times_ quite
recently headed '_A Confirmed Pickpocket_.' I am all for the religious
improvement of the dangerous classes, and what I want to know is
_Firstly_, Was the lad a pickpocket before he was confirmed? _Secondly_,
Or, did he become a pickpocket after confirmation? _Thirdly_, What
bishop or curate was responsible for his confirmation? Other questions
arise out of this case, but these are enough for the present.

                                     Yours,      A FEMALE SEARCHER."

                                 * * *

FROM OUR OWN SMALL SCHOLAR.--"That's where I should like to be," sighed
SAM SUCKER minimus, as in his geography lesson he read the name of
Orange Free State. "Fancy, oranges free!!"

                               * * * * *

                          A MODEL REMODELLED.

The "Revised Edition"--probably to style it "The Revised Version" would
savour too much of the Biblical Committee Room--of _An Artist's Model_
now removed to the Lyric is occasionally "funny," though not absolutely
"without being" occasionally "vulgar." Its weakest point is its story,
but as the plot only occasionally obtrudes itself upon the audience, the
weakest point is, therefore, not worth mentioning, only its strong
points, which consist in MARIE TEMPEST'S singing, but not in what she
has to sing, and in Miss LETTY LIND'S mild warbling and charming
dancing, which latter thoroughly deserves the hearty encores she
obtains, as does also Mr. FARKOA'S capital rendering of an otherwise not
particularly brilliant French laughing song. Mr. ERIC LEWIS and Mr. W.
BLAKELEY attain great distinction by their clever rendering of nothing
in particular.

Mr. HAYDEN COFFIN appears depressed. But comic relief to his sentimental
sadness is given by both LAWRANCE D'ORSAY, with as much of the
traditional D'ORSAY courtliness that is left of it, and Mr. FARREN
SOUTAR, worthy inheritor of a double talent. Lyrics of H. GREENBANK
neat, as they always are; but the compositions of Mr. SIDNEY JONES will
probably "keep the stage," as it is impossible, at one hearing, at all
events, to carry any of it away with you. The "house," on this occasion,
excellent; far better than the piece.

                               * * * * *

                             Joseph's Coat.

    ["There is a Chinese regiment which enjoys the terrible and
    glorious appellation of 'The Tiger-Braves.' They are dressed in
    coats covered with spots to resemble the skin of the animal from
    which they take their name.... The Government are a regiment of
    Tiger-Braves."--_Mr. Chamberlain at Birmingham._]

      JOE, who should know all about "beasts" and "caves,"
      Now calls his whilom colleagues "Tiger-Braves."
      Well, his own coat bears strange new Party blots,
      He is a leopard who _has_ "changed his spots."

                               * * * * *

DELIGHTFUL PROGRAMME.--We see that Mr. CHARLES REDDIE advertises a
morning concert for June 11 at Prince's Hall. The audience will be
there, and he will be always "Reddie, aye Reddie." Exhausted after
playing, he will re-appear and be _Reddie-vivus_; and, in fact, there is
a perfect store of puns on his name which must have frequently occurred
to himself as a Reddie-witted person. That he is to be assisted by M.
EMIL SAURET on the violin no one will be Sauret to hear; and that
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE gives his name and presence on this occasion will
make the concert ever memorable. Concert under direction of ubiquitous
DANIEL MAYER, in himself Mayer and Corporation of musical world.

                                 * * *

CITY INTELLIGENCE.--In view of the French President's accepting an
invitation from the LORD MAYOR, the Common Councillors are daily
practising a bacchanalian chorus, in harmony, of which the words are:--

      "_Faure!_ he's a jolly good fellow,
        And so say all of us!"

                                 * * *

LYCEUM ADVERTISEMENT.--"_King Arthur_"--Sir HENRY IRVING. Knightly
performance.

                                 * * *

MOTTO FOR EARL'S COURT EXHIBITION.--Open for "Wheel or Woe!"

                                 * * *

COMBINED DISPLAY OF ALL ARMS.--A _soirée dansante_ during the season.

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: "WHAT MAKES YOU THINK HE CARES FOR YOU?"

"WHY, MAMMA TALKED TO HIM FOR MORE THAN AN HOUR LAST EVENING, AND HE
REALLY SEEMED TO ENJOY IT!"]

                               * * * * *

                      "WATERS, WATERS EVERYWHERE!"

One of the reasons for the popularity of Apollinaris Water mentioned the
other day at a "meeting of the waters" was, that men generally soon
became on such intimate terms with this water-nymph as to be able to
speak of her familiarly as "Polly." "Whisky and Polly" seemed to go so
well together as to be suggestive of a round dance, in which the admirer
of "Polly" was whisky-ing her round the ball-room. The gradual rise of
Johannis in public opinion, delayed, of course, in the first place, by
politeness on the part of "Johnnie," who must cede the _pas_ to "Polly,"
is due to the fact that the aërated-water drinkers had not made up their
minds as to whether Johannis was to be addressed as "Jo" or "Johnnie."
We believe that "Johnnie" is now the accepted appellation. Whether
"Johnnie" and "Polly" are on the best terms, this deponent knoweth not;
nor is he aware that during the season The Bishop of Bath and Wells or
The Bishop of Sodor-water-and-Man will bless the union of "Johnnie" and
"Polly," though at one time there was a report to that effect. To alter
the title of the old semi-nautical drama, _Poll and Partner Joe_, of
which the second hero was a Water-man, "Poll and her Partner Johnnie"
ought to get on well together.

                               * * * * *

                           AFTER WHITSUNTIDE.

_Brown._ You're looking extremely well.

_Jones._ Never fitter!

_Brown._ Took a run to Paris, eh?

_Jones._ No. Saw French play, though.

_Brown._ Went to seaside or river, eh?

_Jones._ No. Can't stand expensive discomfort. I had some decent
boating, though.

_Brown._ Went for inland scenery?

_Jones._ No; although I sauntered under noble trees, and got some
magnificent views.

_Brown._ Switzerland? Italy?

_Jones._ No time for long journeys. I enjoyed fine air, and walked
twenty miles a day; studied fine Old Masters, and enjoyed a stroll in a
museum which has no equal.

_Brown._ Really!! Then, in the name of wonder, _where_ have you been
staying?

_Jones._ In London.

                                    [_Farewells exchanged, and exeunt._

                               * * * * *

                        A KNIGHT OF THE WILLOW;

                    _Or, why not "Sir W. G. Grace"?_

    ["Dr. W. G. GRACE, whose name has been everywhere of
    late--except where it might well have been, on the Birthday
    Honours list."--_Times._]

      Why not? Great Scott! "The play's the thing,"
      Before the footlights, round the ring
        At Lord's, it little matters,--
      Easily first _is_ easily first!
      Just fancy what a glorious burst
      From throats aglow with zeal--and thirst--
        Would hail the Knight of Batters!

      They've shouted for him many a time,
      Whose mellow age is still his prime,
        And others' youth surpasses;
      But how they'd make the welkin split
      If honours donors had the wit
      To knight this Hero of the Hit,
        And favourite of the masses!

      "The play's the thing." Sir HENRY IRVING
      Sounds well. Who'll question _his_ deserving
        When 'midst the knights they place it?
      But here's a player just as great
      In his own field. Why should he wait?
      However high be knighthood's state,
        The name of GRACE will grace it!

      What greater joy to crowds affords
      Than the announcement "GRACE at Lord's"?
        What lots of "Lords" and "Graces"
      Do less than England's W. G.
      To furnish genuine sport and glee
      To thousands, who still throng to see
        How well he "times" and "places."

      True, "Thunderer," true! He stands the test.
      Unmatched, unchallengeable Best
        At our best game! Requite him!
      For thirty years to hold first place,
      And still, unpassed, keep up the pace,
      Pleases a stout, sport-loving race.
      By Jove, "Sir WILLIAM GILBERT GRACE"
        Sounds splendid. _Punch_ says--"_Knight him!_"

                               * * * * *

                     "IN THE NAME OF PROFIT--TOGS!"

It seems that the uniform of the SHAHZADA, worn by his Highness on State
occasions in England, was designed by a Briton, and consequently is not
included in the official garb of the Afghan Army. Presumably the same
sartorial artist was responsible for NASRULLA'S "get up" at the Derby.
The son of our ally appeared on that memorable occasion in "a harmony in
grey"--grey frock-coat, waistcoat and trousers, with grey fez turban to
match. No doubt the head-dress was relieved with a diamond worth
£1,000,000, or something of the sort, just to show that our guest was of
eastern origin. The following suggestion for complete outfits may be
found useful:--

_Yachting._--Suit of blue serge, covered with rubies and diamonds. Straw
hat, made of golden wire, encrusted with emeralds. Tan shoes, studded
with brilliants. Shirt of silver tissue, with collar and cuffs of virgin
gold. Telescope of turquoise, with sling of linked Queen Anne's guineas.

_Shooting._--Suit of ditto's of gold tissue. Shoulder-guard of diamonds.
Deer-stalker of birds of Paradise breast-feathers. Boots of young
crocodile leather, embroidered with lapis lazuli.

_Private Dinners._--Gold coat and trousers. Silver shirt and waistcoat.
Diamond opera hat and overcoat of various precious stones. Handkerchief
of woven brilliants. Necktie of antediluvian aluminium at £520 10_s._
4_d._ a grain.

                               * * * * *

                        TARTARIN SUR LA TAMISE.

M. ALPHONSE DAUDET has gone back to his own country. He is pleased with
us on the whole. We have learnt his language and read his books.

We are not so clever or intelligent as the French; but we are more
stable of purpose and despise ridicule, and keep ourselves well informed
about other countries. _L'enfant dit vrai, peut-être!_

Our women, however, are inferior to French women, as they lack either
beauty or taste: and the less said about their looks and dress the
better. _Toujours galant, "le petit Chose!" Pécaïré!_ TARTARIN has
surpassed himself; and if he manages to persuade his fair compatriots
that he is sincere in this, _il aura bien mérité de la patrie_; and will
recover all his old popularity. Nothing will remain for him but to prove
that we lost the Battle of Waterloo, and that the Lord Mayor is a more
important person than Queen VICTORIA. After that, "_Aux grands hommes de
la France, la Patrie reconnaissante_."

                                 * * *

_The Latest Edition of "The Chronicles of Holinshed,"_ written by JOHN
"of that ilk." Honest JOHN is outspoken. His motto is the truth and
nothing but the truth--as far as he can recollect it. His memory appears
to be good. JOHN is Frank.

                                 * * *

DRAMATIC TEMPORARY PROVERB (_adapted for Garrick Theatre_).--"When the
HARE is away the WILLARD will play."

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: INSULARITY.

"BY THE WAY, RADDLES, A RUSSIAN PRINCE IS COMING TO DINE WITH US NEXT
WEEK!"

"AH, THEN, SIR, I SUPPOSE HE AIN'T O' MUCH ACCOUNT IN HIS OWN COUNTRY?"]

                               * * * * *

                                REGRETS.

                "_To wish is folly, to regret absurd._"

That I went out in my new hat and light summer clothes, and did not take
my umbrella the only day within the last fortnight when there was an
hour's rain.

That I had already accepted an invitation when one to a party that would
have been infinitely more pleasant all round subsequently arrived.

That I took that champagne last night, and some other things.

That I left off my winter "things" before summer had set in.

That I returned to my winter "things" just when summer weather did set
in.

That I went out to supper and supped heartily.

That I didn't have that tooth out when it first pained me.

That my dentist should take a four days' holiday just when I wanted him
badly.

That I put into five sweeps and drew blank.

That I lent a man half-a-sovereign.

That I didn't back the winner.

                                 * * *

COMMERCIAL AND NAUTICAL.--Two City men, twin brothers and partners, in
character the very reverse of CHARLES DICKENS'S kind and generous
_Cheerybles_, are known as "The Twin Screws."

                                 * * *

WHITSUNTIDE.--"Don't stop in! I'll take you out if you'll only come," as
the dentist said to the tooth.

                               * * * * *

                         ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

                 EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, May, 27._--RITCHIE back to-day, after long
absence. Changed address from Tower Hamlets to Croydon. Waiting to be
called to table by SPEAKER, had opportunity of hearing long debate round
Bill promoted by London County Council. RITCHIE, as President of Local
Government Board in last Ministry, made London County Council possible.
Happy thought to play him in, as it were, with County Council debate.

"Been out of it nearly three years now, TOBY," said RITCHIE, when, one
of a score of old members, I went to shake hands and bid him welcome;
"just the same old place; perhaps a little duller at the moment. What
they want is new blood, or, perhaps, better still, a re-infusion of old
blood. Can't give them a new County Council Bill; must try and make them
somehow sit up."

These thoughts pressed upon him as he stood at table signing Roll of
Parliament after having been sworn in. Brought his hat with him, as new
Members do, since, as yet, they have no peg to hang it on. Placed it on
table whilst he signed the Roll. Passing on to be introduced to SPEAKER,
observed with a start that there were two hats on the table. Odd. Was
sure he had brought only one. Blessed is the man who makes two blades of
grass grow where formerly only one peeped forth. Possibly analagous
benison for a man who, planting one hat down on a table, looks and
behold there are two. Happy omen; make the most of it; wouldn't do to go
off with two hats. House sure to remark it. Besides, how could he shake
hands with the SPEAKER holding a hat in either hand? Next best thing to
select the newest; did so with pretty air of abstraction; advanced one
step between table and Treasury Bench on way to SPEAKER'S chair when he
felt firm grip on his elbow, and a well known voice in his ear.

"Give me neither RITCHIES nor poverty, but do leave me my hat."

It was the voice of the SQUIRE OF MALWOOD.

"Oh, I beg your pardon. How d'ye do?" said RITCHIE, hurriedly returning
the SQUIRE'S Sunday hat, and taking up his own, which had suffered the
rigours of a wet and windy nomination day.

House cheered and laughed. KNATCHBULL-HUGESSEN gravely shook his head.
"That's all very well," said he. "But a man who would pander to the
lowest instincts of humanity by clearing the way for parish councils,
would do anything."

[Illustration: Ritchie Redivivus!

(From a sketch picked up near the Front Opposition Bench.)]

_Business done._--Another night's talk round Welsh Disestablishment
Bill.

_Tuesday._--Prospect of hearing JOHN WILLIAM move adjournment of House
over Derby Day, and JOHN LENG reply on other side, sufficed to crowd
benches. Such encounter of wits rarely delights mankind these degenerate
days. Such lightness of touch! Such gleaming attack! Such brilliant
defence! In short, such badinage! Such persiflage! Old Members recall
earlier conflicts in same field. Young Members look back on clever
speech made by ELCHO in moving adjournment one year, capped by equally
brilliant speech when, in the following Session, he seconded WILFRID
LAWSON on the negative course. This and all else would be excelled when
JOHN WILLIAM began to jest, and LENG made light reply.

[Illustration: _Cromwell._ "Brother JOSEPH, Brother JOSEPH, for a
Roundhead I find thee in strange company!"

"But what a pity it is that we cannot revive Oliver Cromwell in the
flesh, and not only in marble."

                      _Mr. Chamberlain's Speech at Birmingham, May 29._]

This was natural expectation from reputation of these famous wits. In
dreary conversation that followed there was one solitary flicker of
humour; it was discovered by anxious searcher in the circumstance that
the whole business was utterly, hopelessly prosaic. There wasn't a laugh
in it from beginning to end. House begins to think it has had enough of
this elaborate annual tourney of humour. Next year, if motion for
adjournment over Derby Day is made, it will be better to have question
put forthwith, and so divide. Another experience like the exceedingly
bad half-hour endured this afternoon is more than should fall to the lot
of a single generation.

_Business done._--House agreed by 221 votes against 174 that it could
not afford to take a holiday. Straightway proceeded to waste remainder
of sitting in vain repetition of argument round clauses of Welsh
Disestablishment Bill.

_Thursday._--Well for PRINCE ARTHUR he chanced to be absent to-night
when Cap'en TOMMY BOWLES hauled alongside SILOMIO and raked him fore and
aft. KENYON, who knows more than you think when you hear him speak,
tells me it is pretty certain when the next Government is formed SILOMIO
will have his choice of succeeding either EDWARD GREY or SYDNEY BUXTON.
Neither office is of Cabinet rank. But with the chief in the Lords, a
statesman of SILOMIO'S ability and sagacity can make and keep a position
equal in importance and influence to some more highly placed. No one
will deny that the promotion will have been well earned. The Sheffield
Knight has, perhaps, been more prominently associated with the conduct
of Colonial affairs than with those nominally directed by Lord KIMBERLEY
with the assistance of EDWARD GREY. This is a view strengthened by the
circumstance of the honourable title conferred upon him by the
emissaries from Swaziland. Actually, SILOMIO knows quite as much of
Foreign Affairs as he does of Colonial.

To-night, on Vote on Account, he concentrated his attention on the
action of the Foreign Office. Surveying its operations from China to
Peru, he was constrained unreservedly to condemn them. Everywhere the
British Minister had truckled to the foreigner. The flag of England,
which the emigrants in the _Mayflower_ proudly carried with them even in
their exile, was dragged through every gutter of foreign capitals.

"There never was a time," said SILOMIO, "when this country was so
isolated among the nations of Europe."

This grand speech echoed through nearly empty House. PRINCE ARTHUR and
his colleagues on Front Opposition Bench, as usual, paid their
distinguished colleague the highest compliment. They knew he would say
the right thing in the right way, at the right time. Whilst he kept the
gate no traitor could pass, no harm befall a beloved country. So, with
one accord, they went off, leaving CASABIANCA SILOMIO to tread alone the
deck, burning with his eloquence.

On the benches behind sat only TOMLINSON, who sometimes wishes PRINCE
ARTHUR had a little more of SILOMIO'S go; KNATCHBULL-HUGESSEN who
doesn't think the Knight is quite the model of a country gentleman, but
likes to hear him shout at the Government; and Cap'en TOMMY BOWLES,
wearing his best Sunday ducks in honour of a sultry day that reminds him
faintly of breathless moments spent in the Forties in the Bight of
Benin.

[Illustration: An Authority on Heraldry!

(Mr. Eg-rt-n All-n.)]

SILOMIO sat down and mopped the shining top of his patriotic head with a
handkerchief hemmed in Germany. The Cap'en, catching the Chairman's eye
with the hook that serves in place of the strong right hand cut off by
the flashing blade of the Moor whose felucca TOMMY was boarding under
the impression it was a ferry-boat, sprang to his feet. "Unthinking
diatribes," he called SILOMIO'S noble speech; lamented the effect upon
foreign powers of its delivery "by a responsible leader of the party";
and said much else that would have shocked the House had Members chanced
to be present. PRINCE ARTHUR, who so acutely felt, and so bitterly
resented, GEORGE RUSSELL'S recent sneer at the Patriot Knight, was
spared the anguish of the moment by that carefully concerted movement
which, happily, calls SILOMIO'S colleagues off the Front Bench when he
is about to discourse on Foreign Affairs.

_Business done._--Vote on Account agreed to.

_Friday._--House met to wind up business previous to Whitsun recess.
ALPHEUS CLEOPHAS, always considerate, been thinking over ways of
enjoying the holiday. Struck him nothing would be nicer than free
admission for M.P.'s and their friends to witness process of
vivisection. Put the matter before HOME SECRETARY in his genial way.
ASQUITH very sorry, but has no power to give the desired admission.
ALPHEUS CLEOPHAS a little depressed, but went off with the consciousness
that he had at least done his best.

"There is no enterprise in these people, TOBY," he complained. "We in
London are much behind the age. We haven't here what in Paris is, I
believe, called the Mor-gew: a nice, quiet place to turn into when you
are out holiday-making. I have my own resources. When house is shut and
I can't go about the basement and cellars smelling out the oil lamps, I
sit on edge of fountain in Trafalgar Square and sniff its balmy waters.
Everyone not equally independent. If we had only about the parks and in
the thoroughfares places open to the respectable public where they might
see vivisection going on, we should be a happier nation."

_Business done._--House adjourned for the Whitsun recess. Back again
June 10.

                               * * * * *

                          Wail of the Wire-puller.

      Oh dear, what can the matter be?
        R-S-B-RY doesn't seem hearty.
      'Tis very well winning the Derby "Blue Ribbon,"
        But _that_ will not bind up--our Party!

                                 * * *

NASRULLA KHAN.--On the Sunday immediately following his uncommonly
fatiguing first day in town, the SHAHZADA was requested to visit the
Zoo. Wire from Porcupine, who, on account of his splendid set of quills,
acts as Secretary to the Zoo Society, ran thus:--"_Will Khan visit
Zoo?_" Exhausted Receiver's reply brief but to the point, exhibiting
fine mastery of English language, "_Khan can't_."

                                 * * *

CLASSIC TITLE FOR DR. GRACE.--"The Centurion."




Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Throughout the document, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

Throughout the dialogues, there were words used to mimic accents of
the speakers. Those words were retained as-is.

The illustrations have been moved so that they do not break up
paragraphs and so that they are next to the text they illustrate.

Errors in punctuation and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.

On page 267, a period was added after "sufferers from insomnia".

On page 267, "litte" was replaced with "little".

On page 273, "Lind s" was replaced with "Lind's".

On page 275, a single quotation mark was replaced with a double
quotation mark before "Ah, then, Sir, I suppose".

On page 275, a single quotation mark was replaced with a double
quotation mark after "Oh, I beg your pardon. How d'ye do?".

On page 275, "nea" was replaced with "near".






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
108, June 8, 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, JUNE 8, 1895 ***

***** This file should be named 40990-8.txt or 40990-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/9/40990/

Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Malcolm Farmer,
Ernest Schaal. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
