Project Gutenberg's Little Frankie and his Mother, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Little Frankie and his Mother

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: January 3, 2011 [EBook #34830]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)












MRS. LESLIE'S BOOKS FOR LITTLE CHILDREN.

THE LITTLE FRANKIE SERIES.




BOOKS WRITTEN OR EDITED

By A. R. BAKER,

AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.

QUESTION BOOKS on the Topics of Christ's Sermon on the Mount.

          VOL. I. FOR CHILDREN.
          VOL. II. FOR YOUTH.
          VOL. III. FOR ADULTS.

          LECTURES ON THESE TOPICS, _in press_.


MRS. LESLIE'S SABBATH SCHOOL BOOKS.

          TIM, THE SCISSORS GRINDER.
          SEQUEL TO "TIM, THE SCISSORS GRINDER."
          PRAIRIE FLOWER.
          THE BOUND BOY.
          THE BOUND GIRL.
          VIRGINIA.
          THE TWO HOMES; OR, EARNING AND SPENDING.
          THE ORGAN-GRINDER, _in press_.


QUESTION BOOKS. The Catechism tested by the Bible.

          VOL. I. FOR CHILDREN.
          VOL. II. FOR ADULTS.


THE DERMOTT FAMILY; or, Stories Illustrating the Catechism.

          VOL. I. DOCTRINES RESPECTING GOD AND MANKIND.
           "  II. DOCTRINES OF GRACE.
           " III. COMMANDMENTS OF THE FIRST TABLE.
           "  IV. COMMANDMENTS OF THE SECOND TABLE.
           "   V. CONDITIONS OF ETERNAL LIFE.


MRS. LESLIE'S HOME LIFE.

          VOL. I. CORA AND THE DOCTOR.
           "  II. COURTESIES OF WEDDED LIFE.
           " III. THE HOUSEHOLD ANGEL.


MRS. LESLIE'S JUVENILE SERIES.

          VOL. I. THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
           "  II. PLAY AND STUDY.
           " III. HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
           "  IV. TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
           "   V. JACK, THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER.
           "  VI. THE YOUNG HOUSEKEEPER.
           " VII. LITTLE AGNES.


THE ROBIN REDBREAST SERIES.

          THE ROBINS' NEST.
          LITTLE ROBINS IN THE NEST.
          LITTLE ROBINS LEARNING TO FLY.
          LITTLE ROBINS IN TROUBLE.
          LITTLE ROBINS' FRIENDS.
          LITTLE ROBINS' LOVE ONE TO ANOTHER.


THE LITTLE FRANKIE SERIES.

          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AT HIS PLAYS.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS COUSIN.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS FATHER.
          LITTLE FRANKIE ON A JOURNEY.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AT SCHOOL.

[Illustration: FRANKIE IN HIS JUMPER.]





LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER.

          BY
          MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,

          AUTHOR OF "THE HOME LIFE SERIES;" "MRS. LESLIE'S
          JUVENILE SERIES," ETC.

          BOSTON:
          CROSBY AND NICHOLS.
          117 WASHINGTON STREET.




  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by
  A. R. BAKER,
  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District
  of Massachusetts.

  ELECTROTYPED AT THE
  BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY.




LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER.




CHAPTER I.

FRANKIE'S SILVER CUP.


DO you wish to know who little Frankie was, and where he lived? Come and
sit down in your pretty chair by my side, and I will tell you. Frankie
was not the real name of this little boy. When he was a tiny baby, not
much larger than black Dinah, his father came home one night from his
store, and asked, "Have you named the baby yet, mamma?"

"No," she answered, "I have not; but I have been thinking that if you
are pleased, I should like to call him Frank."

"Frank, Frank, Frankie," said his father, repeating it over and over
again, to hear how it would sound. "Yes, I like the name; and then my
friend, Mr. Wallace, is called Frank. Yes, Frank it shall be."

"While he is a baby, we will call him Frankie," said his mamma. So that
was the way he obtained so pretty a name.

About a week after this, there came one day a man on horseback riding up
to the front door. He jumped briskly down upon the wide stone step, and
rang the bell with a loud, quick jerk, which seemed to say, I am in a
hurry. Margie, the errand girl, ran to the door, when the man gave her a
box wrapped nicely in a piece of yellow paper, and tied with a small red
cord. Then he sprang upon the saddle, and galloped away down the avenue
into the road.

Margie carried the box into the parlor, and gave it to her mistress.
Mamma looked at the name on the paper, and her bright, loving eyes grew
still brighter. She took her scissors and cut the cord which held the
paper around the box, then pulled off the cover, and what do you think
was there? Why, a large piece of pink cotton nicely folded about a
beautiful silver cup, on one side of which was marked the name _Little
Frankie_.

Mamma laughed as she read it, and felt sure the pretty present came from
Mr. Wallace. She ran gayly up stairs into the nursery, where the baby
was sitting in the lap of his nurse, shaking his coral bells. "Here, my
darling," she said; "see what a nice cup has come for you; look! it is
so bright I can peep at your rosy face in it."

Baby crowed and stretched out his tiny hands, but he could not quite
reach it; and if he could he would have tried to crowd it into his
mouth. So mamma took him in her arms, and squeezed him very tight, and
kissed him ever so many times, until the little fellow was quite
astonished. Then she held him off a little to look at him; and her eyes
were so brimful of love that Frankie was never tired of gazing into
them.

By and by, mamma carried the baby and the new cup down to the parlor;
for papa had just come in, and was already calling for them.

Papa admired the present very much, and said that his friend, Mr.
Wallace, was a noble fellow, and he should be glad if their little
Frankie made as good a man. Then papa danced around the room, "to give
his boy a little exercise," he said, "and make him grow." But mamma
screamed, and was afraid so much shaking would take away her baby's
breath.

"Come, then," said papa, "we will sit down and trot a little." He
seated the little fellow on his knee, and began, "This is the way the
lady rides, trot, trot, trot, trot. This is the way the gentleman rides,
de canter, de canter, de canter, de canter. This is the way the huntsman
rides, de gallop, de gallop, de gallop."

Frankie laughed and cooed, and as soon as his papa stopped, kicked his
little feet to have it go again.




CHAPTER II.

FRANKIE'S LITTLE NURSE.


FRANKIE lived in a quiet, pleasant village about twenty miles from the
city. His home was a pretty cottage with a steep roof rising above the
windows of the second story. In front there was a smooth, green lawn,
and at the side a lovely flower garden, with nicely gravelled walks
leading through it. Then back of the house there were beds of peas, and
beans, and turnips, and beets, and all kinds of good things for the
table.

Frankie had a brother whose name was Willie, and who was five years
older than he. There had been a dear sister, too, but when she was only
one year old, the Saviour called her home to heaven; and she went with a
sweet smile upon her lip.

Beside his father, and mother, and Willie, there were in Frankie's
home, Jane, the cook, Sally, the nurse, and Margie, a little girl seven
years of age, who loved dearly to dance about and amuse the baby boy.
She was the daughter of Jane, and her father had been dead many years.
She had begun to go to school; but as soon as the teacher rang the bell
for the scholars to go home, Margie caught her bonnet from the hook, and
ran away as fast as she could go, she was so impatient to see little
Frankie.

Early in the morning, long before his mamma was ready to awake, the
little fellow would open his eyes and crow, and sing his morning song.
Then he would try to get his tiny toes into his mouth. As soon as Margie
heard him, she would knock softly at the door, and ask, "May I come in
and play with Frankie?"

If you were to see her, you would think she was quite an old lady; she
went around so steadily, and not at all like a school girl. First, she
took all the pillows from the cradle, and shook them up. Then she laid
them back so that the baby could sit up and see her play to him. When
all was ready, she would go to the side of the bed, and Frankie's papa
would put him carefully into her arms, and then turn over to take
another nap.

It was very strange that with all Margie's singing and laughing, and
crying "catchee, catchee, now catch baby;" and with Frankie's happy
shouts of delight, papa and mamma could sleep quite soundly. But the
instant the little fellow cried, as he sometimes did when he hurt his
gums against his coral ring, and Margie said, "O dear! has he hurt him?
Margie's sorry," mamma would spring from bed and be wide awake in a
minute.

There was one other member of the family whom I have not yet mentioned.
It was not a brother, nor a sister, but a large black dog, whose name
was Ponto. He was a very handsome fellow, with his shining black hair,
and his white ring about his neck; and he held his head up and looked
you right in the face, as if he knew that he was above common dogs.
Ponto liked to run in the garden with Willie, and catch the sticks his
young master threw to him between his teeth. But best of all he liked to
follow him to the nursery, and watch the motions of the new comer.
Frankie's eyes grew very large the first time he felt Ponto's cold nose
on his arm; and he cried, when the great, black creature began to lick
his hands and face. Mamma tried to push Ponto away, and Willie laughed
most merrily.

This, you know, was Ponto's way of showing that he was fond of the dear
baby; and from this time a strong affection sprang up between them.
While Frankie slept, the dog lay down by the cradle, to be sure that no
harm came to his precious charge; and when he awoke, Ponto made a
noise, meaning, "I'll take care of you, baby."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

FRANKIE'S JUMPER.


FRANKIE was now six months old. He had begun to sit upon the floor.
First he could only sit there by having pillows placed all about him.
Then one day nurse took away the pillows, and said the little fellow
must learn to do without them. She set him up very straight, and put a
large book outside his clothes between his feet, so that he could not
easily fall over. Then she took her sewing and sat down on the floor
beside him.

Frankie laughed, and thought this was very fine; but in one minute he
reached a little too far, and over he went right on to his nose.

Nurse caught him up before he had time to cry, and tossed him up and
down until he had forgotten his trouble; then she set him down again.
So that by the time mamma came home from a long walk, he had almost
learned to sit alone.

O, how much pleased mamma was! She took off her bonnet and shawl,
laughing all the time, and then she stopped ever so many times while she
was giving the little fellow his dinner, and squeezed him closer to her
side, and told him he was getting to be a brave boy indeed.

Hearing so much that was merry, Ponto roused himself from his sleep, and
began to rap with his tail on the floor. Then, when Frankie crowed out a
pretty sound, he sprang upon his feet, and looked around a minute with
his great, black eyes, when he gave a loud bark, "_bow, wow, wow_."
Little boy, I say, "_bow, wow, wow_."

One day Willie went with his mother to call upon a lady who had a baby
girl just about as old as Frankie. The servant asked them to go to the
nursery and see the baby in her jumper. O, what a funny sight that was!
How the two mammas, and the nurse, and Willie laughed, to see the little
creature dance about from one side of the room to the other. Frankie's
mamma said her little boy must have a jumper too.

The lady, whose name was Ida Mills, gave her the pattern of the little
jacket her baby wore when she jumped; and Mrs. Gray said she would ask
her husband to call and see the jumper, so that he could tell the
carpenter how to make one.

In two days Frankie's jacket was ready, and his jumper too. His mamma
had told him all about it. But he only laughed and cooed the same as
ever, and did not seem at all to understand it.

When papa came home to dinner that day, he heard such a loud noise from
the nursery, that he ran quickly up there to see what was the matter.

When he opened the door he saw his little boy fastened to a long pole,
which swung about the room like a crane, and mamma on her knees trying
to teach him to touch his little toes to the floor, and make himself
dance. There, too, were Jane, the cook, and Sally, the nurse, laughing,
while Margie and Willie were clapping their hands every time Frankie
gave a spring.

Just then Ponto came running up the stairs, and as soon as he saw his
little master, he began to bark most furiously. He did not like to see
him hung up so, and he meant to give his opinion about it.

Frankie had for a long time been fond of using his feet, and had often
done so in his mother's lap, until he almost sprang out of her arms; but
at first he did not know what mamma wanted him to do. But presently he
began to jump; and when he found how easily he could set himself to
dancing, he was so much pleased that he gave a scream of delight.

Willie ran to the other side of the room, and put his coral bells in a
chair, and called out, "Come, Frankie, come to brother;" and the little
dancer jumped across the room as briskly as if he had done it every day
of his life.

O, what laughing there was then! What shouting! What clapping of hands!
Mamma ran to kiss her baby, and call him her darling boy.

All this time the dinner was on the table; and at last, Jane said, "O,
dear, the dinner will be as cold as a stone!" But papa and mamma said
they had rather see Frankie learn to jump, than to eat the best dinner
that ever was cooked.




CHAPTER IV.

FRANKIE'S BROTHER WILLIE.


IT was a long time before Ponto became reconciled to see Frankie in his
jumper. He barked loud and long, as if he was afraid his little friend
would hurt himself, tied up in so strange a manner. But baby grew every
day more fond of this exercise; and as soon as he saw his mother take
the jacket, he would spring so that she could hardly hold him still
enough to fasten the buttons tightly to the wooden frame. One day, when
he and his mamma were alone in the nursery, he grew very sleepy, and at
last his little head nodded down, down, quite upon his breast. Mamma
laughed softly, and she waited a minute to see what he would do.
Presently he awoke a little, and touched his toes to the floor to make
the jumper spring, and get himself to sleep again. Then she took him in
her arms, and after loosing the buttons to his jacket, laid him in his
cradle for a nice nap.

One day Willie came running into the room when mamma was singing to the
baby, who was not well. He was a good boy, and knew that he must not
make a noise; so he took a cricket, and sat down by her side. He loved
to hear the gentle lullaby; but now he wondered why mamma looked so
sober. Pretty soon he saw one, two, three, tears drop right upon
Frankie's head. Her face was always so full of smiles that he knew not
what to make of it. She got up to put the baby in the cradle, and then
she saw Willie looking at her as if he wondered what this meant.

"Come here, my dear," she said softly, laying his head on her shoulder.
"Mamma has been praying the good God for you and your little brother."

"Are you afraid Frankie is going to die, as sister did?" asked Willie;
"I saw some tears on your cheeks."

"No, dear," said mamma. "I was thinking how kind God was to give me two
such dear boys. Then I looked at Frankie's hands, such pretty little
fingers and thumbs, and I asked God never to let them do that which was
naughty, never to allow them to strike or take what did not belong to
them."

Willie gazed a moment at his hands; I suppose he was trying to think
whether they had been naughty hands or good hands. Presently he said,
"Toes can't do wrong, I think, mamma, as hands can."

"Ah, yes, my dear," said his mother. "Only yesterday I knew a little boy
whose feet were very naughty, and walked away where he had been
forbidden to go."

Willie's face grew very red. "I forgot about that," he said in a
whisper.

"Do you remember," asked his mother, "the lady who visited here with her
little girl, and how she used to kick and stamp her feet when she could
not do exactly as she wished? Were those good feet, and do you think her
heavenly Father was pleased to see how she was using them?"

"O, no, indeed, mamma! But I guess God liked it when I used my feet to
carry James Wells's ball home, because he would have lost it if I had
not given it to him."

"Yes, dear, your feet and your hands, too, were good then; and beside
that, there was a kind feeling in your heart, which made you wish to
carry the ball to the poor boy."

"I'm glad I did it," said Willie, smiling in his mother's face. "Did you
think any thing about Frankie's mouth?"

"Yes, indeed, I prayed that my darling baby might use his sweet little
mouth to praise God, and that never, no, never might a naughty word come
out of it. O, how dreadful it is to think that little boys or little
girls should use the gifts of the good God to disobey his holy laws!"




CHAPTER V.

FRANKIE'S NEW LESSONS.


WHEN Frankie was a year old, his mamma thought it quite time for him to
learn to go to bed by himself. So she took him up in her chamber, and
shut the blinds, to keep out all the flies. Then she gave him his
luncheon, and laid him on Willie's trundle-bed. This was low; and she
thought, if he tried to get off, it would not hurt him as much as if it
were higher. "Now," said she, "my darling must be good, and shut his
eyes, and go to sleep; and then mamma will come and put on his pretty
cap and shoes, and take him to ride in his little wagon." She kissed
him, and went into the dressing room, to see what he would do.

But Frankie did not like this at all, and he began to cry as loud as he
could, and call for his mamma to come back. When he found this did no
good, he stuck up his stomach, and kicked his feet, and at last he held
his breath until his mamma was frightened, and ran to hold him up.

"Frankie is naughty," she said; "mamma can't kiss a naughty boy." Then
she laid him down again, and started to go away. But he cried as loud as
ever, until mamma was obliged to pat his dear little hands until they
looked quite red. She went away, and stood where she could look through
the crack of the door. He called "mamma," two or three times, and then,
tired with his crying, he fell asleep.

"Dear little Frankie!" she said, coming to the bed and kissing the tears
off his rosy cheeks. "It made mamma's heart ache to whip him."

In a few days the little fellow had learned this new lesson; and though
he missed his mother's arms folded tenderly about him, and the sweet
smiles which mingled with the hushaby in his infant dreams, yet he grew
reconciled to it at last, and became a very good baby.

Every day now he learned something new; first to say, "Wee," for Willie;
then to hide his tiny head behind a handkerchief, as Margie did when
she played peep a-boo with him. Another time he held out his hand for
the brush, and tried to smooth Willie's hair; but instead of that he
tangled the close curls most terribly, so that the poor boy could hardly
keep from crying when mamma combed them out again.

One morning Sally was ill, and obliged to stay in bed. Margie wished to
play with Frankie while her master, and mistress, and Willie were at
prayers; but mamma said, "No; Frankie may come to prayers too."

Papa took the large Bible, and Willie stood close by his side, his
little finger pointing to the verses as the reading went on; and the
baby sat on his mother's knee, his eyes very wide open, to see all that
was going on. He looked first at mamma, and wondered, I suppose, that
she did not smile. Then he turned to papa, who was reading serious
words in a solemn tone. He gazed next in Willie's face; but Willie was
intent upon the book. At last he caught a glimpse of Margie's laughing
eyes, and he spoke right out. The little girl had not heard one word of
the reading. She had been watching Frankie, to see how he would behave;
and now, before she thought where she was, she laughed aloud. But when
she saw that her laughing had made Willie smile and turn from his book,
and that her mistress looked very sorry, she was sorry too, and covered
her blushing face with her little apron.

Frankie sat very still while they sang a pretty hymn beginning:--

          "Majestic sweetness sits enthroned
             Upon the Saviour's brow."

But when papa and mamma kneeled down, he tried to kneel too; and seeing
that mamma shut her eyes, he closed his, but opened them again in a
minute, and tried to get away to run to Willie.

"Frankie is now a year and a half old," said papa, "and must learn to be
still at prayers."

"Can't he come to dinner, too, papa?" asked Willie. "I am almost sure he
will be good."

"I am willing, if mamma is," said papa.

"We will try him," said mamma.

In the middle of the forenoon a man came to the door bringing a new high
chair for Frankie to sit at dinner. Papa had been to the store and
bought it for his baby boy. "O, what a kind papa!"

Frankie was very good the first day and the second day he came to
dinner; but after that he did not behave as well. He pushed away the
plate on which mamma had mashed a nice potato for him, and tried to
reach a dish in which Jane had put some squash. His little fingers were
covered with squash, and mamma had to ring the bell for Margie to bring
the sponge and wash them.

The next day, when papa held down his head to ask God to bless the
food, Frankie bent his face down to the table, and muttered over
something. I suppose he thought he too was praying.

"Will God care?" asked Willie. "Baby don't know that it is naughty to
pray so."

"God never expects children to behave any better than they know how,"
replied mamma.




CHAPTER VI.

FRANKIE'S TEETH.


FRANKIE'S brother Willie had never been to school, but had learned to
read and spell at home, reciting his lessons to his mamma. Papa said he
was now old enough to recite with other boys. So mamma bought him a
little satchel, with a strap to put over his shoulder. Then she put in
it his slate, with a pencil and sponge tied to it, his reading book,
and a new arithmetic with pictures of marbles, and birds, and boys in
it. She washed his face and hands very clean, and curled his hair, which
was so long it hung over his shoulders; then she dressed him in his new
suit, with his nice shining collar basted into the neck, so as to have
him quite ready when his young companion called for him to go to the new
school.

Willie felt very happy this bright morning. He liked the idea of going
with the other boys to school. He thought it would be fine fun to play
ball at recess. There was another reason for his feeling happy. Can you
guess what it was? It was not that his clothes were new, and, as he
could see in the glass, fitted him very well. No, it was because he had
two pockets in his pantaloons. Before this time he had never had but
one, and now he felt smart indeed to be able to place both hands in his
pockets. He walked backwards and forwards before the long mirror in his
mother's chamber, admiring himself exceedingly.

Mamma laughed heartily at the airs he put on; but before he went out,
she told him no persons but rowdies walked with their hands in their
pockets; that papa never did, and she should be very sorry to see her
Willie walk so.

For a few days Frankie's cheeks had been very red indeed, so that Sally
said he looked as handsome as a picter; but mamma was afraid it was
because he was not well. He had a large tin bath tub in the form of a
boat, and one morning, when she put him in it, she found his flesh was
very hot. She took him out into the flannel blanket, which she always
spread in her lap, and rubbed him quickly, that he should not become
chilled; then she coaxed him to let her put her finger into his mouth to
feel whether he had any teeth which troubled him and made him look so
feverish.

He had already quite a mouth full of teeth; but she soon found that
there were two large back teeth trying to force their way through the
gums.

"Poor little fellow," she said; "mamma is sorry his teeth ache." She
laid his aching head on her bosom, and passed her soft hand soothingly
over it, back and forth, a great many times, chanting his favorite
little song, until at length he fell asleep.

          "Once there was a little man,
           Where a little river ran;
           And he had a little farm,
             And a little dairy, O!
           And he had a little plough,
           And a pretty dapple cow,
           Which he often called
             His pretty little Pharaoh.

          "And the little maiden, Ann,
           With her pretty little can,
           Went a milking when the
             Morning sun was beaming, O!
           But she fell,--I don't know how,--
           And she stumbled o'er the plough,
           And the cow was much astonished
             At her screaming, O!

          "Then the funny little man
           To the little river ran,
           To procure a little shiner
             For his dinner, O!
           Then he brought it on a hook
           To the pretty little cook,
           And she placed it on the table
             With his ladle, O!

          "Then the little maiden ran
           With her pretty little can,
           And brought some nice sweet milk from
             Good Mooley, Mrs. Pharaoh!
           And she poured it in a bowl
           For the clever little soul;
           And she placed it by his dish,
             While he sat at table, O!"

Then she went and laid him in her own bed, and took her sewing to sit
down beside him till he awoke.

Presently nurse came in with mamma's bonnet in her hand, and mamma's
shawl on her arm, as the lady had told her she was going to walk. But
now she said, "Frankie is ill, and I shall not leave him to-day."

"I thought he was not very well this morning," said nurse, "for he was
very worrisome, and would not eat his breakfast."

Mamma sat with her sewing for nearly an hour, while Frankie slept, only
once in a while he would moan as if he was in pain; and then she put her
hand on his head again.

When he awoke his eyes were heavy, and instead of jumping out of her lap
to play, he laid his head down on her shoulder.

"Does Frankie want some breakfast?" asked mamma.

He nodded his head; but when nurse brought him some nice bread and milk
in his silver porringer, he only took one taste of it, and then said,
"Patty want water." He could not well say Frankie, but always called
himself Patty.

For several days the poor boy was quite sick, and his mamma never left
him except to run for a few moments to her meals. When he was in great
pain, she soothed him, rocked him, and carried him about the chamber.
Then, when he felt a little better, she sang him pretty songs, or told
him stories, or showed him the pictures in his little books.

There was one little song he always loved to hear; and once, when papa
and mamma were singing at prayers, he made them laugh by saying, "Mamma,
sing Patty tune, pitty tee." He could not talk plain; but he meant
"pretty tree."

Perhaps you have never heard this song; and I will repeat it for you:--

           "Out in a beautiful field
            There stands a pretty pear tree,
            Pretty pear tree with leaves.
          What is there on the tree?
          A very pretty branch.
              Branch on the tree,
              Tree in the ground.

           "Out in the beautiful field
            There stands a pretty pear tree,
            Pretty pear tree with leaves.
          What is there on the branch?
          A very pretty bough.
              Bough on the branch,
              Branch on the tree,
              Tree in the ground.

           "Out in the beautiful field
            There stands a pretty pear tree,
            Pretty pear tree with leaves.
          What is there on the bough?
          A very pretty nest.
              Nest on the bough,
              Bough on the branch,
              Branch on the tree,
              Tree in the ground.

           "Out in a beautiful field
            There stands a pretty pear tree,
            Pretty pear tree with leaves.
          What is there in the nest?
          A very pretty egg.
              Egg in the nest,
              Nest on the bough,
              Bough on the branch,
              Branch on the tree,
              Tree in the ground.

           "Out in a beautiful field
            There stands a pretty pear tree,
            Pretty pear tree with leaves.
          What is there in the egg?
          A very pretty bird.
              Bird in the egg,
              Egg in the nest,
              Nest on the bough,
              Bough on the branch,
              Branch on the tree,
              Tree in the ground."




CHAPTER VII.

FRANKIE'S BREAKFAST.


FRANKIE was now old enough to like to hear stories, and almost every day
he asked, "Pease tell me tory, mamma." Sometimes, when he did not feel
like playing, he would ask her a great many times in a day.

One morning she went into the nursery, after she had eaten her own
breakfast, and found Sally feeding him with his bread and milk.

"He spits it out, ma'am," she said, "and won't let it down his throat."

"Patty want pig, mamma," said the little boy. He meant that he wanted a
fig.

"Has he had a fig this morning?" asked mamma.

"Yes, ma'am," said nurse. "Willie came in eating one, and Frankie cried
for it. So Willie gave it right up to him, though he had only taken one
mouthful. I think he is the generousest boy, ma'am, that I ever see."

Mamma smiled, and seemed very happy when she heard this. You know
nothing makes mammas so happy as to know that their little boys and
girls are good. She said to herself, "Dear child, I will give him
another when he comes in." Then she took Frankie in her arms, and told
nurse to go and eat her own breakfast. She tucked the bib nicely around
his neck, and then she began to feed him. But, as Sally said, he would
not let it down, but spit it all over his clothes and mamma's hand.
"Patty want pig," he said again.

"No, darling, you must eat your breakfast now," said mamma. "Though it
is not so sweet as a fig, it is very good, and will make my little boy
grow and be strong, so that he can run out to play like Willie."

"Patty want pig, mamma," said the baby, putting up his hand to pat
mamma's face. "Patty want pig vely much."

"Frankie shall have a fig by and by," said mamma; "now I will tell him a
little story.

"Once there was a little boy; his name was Harry. He had no kind mamma
to give him good breakfasts. His mamma had gone to heaven to live with
God.

"Little Harry was poor, and often when he woke up he was very hungry.
But he could not lay his head on his mamma's breast, because she was
dead, you know. Poor little Harry used to cry for somebody to come and
take care of him. All babies need some person to hold them and rock
them."

"Patty got mamma," cried the little boy.

"Yes, darling, Frankie has a mamma who loves him dearly, and tries to
take good care of him, and makes him nice warm clothes. But Harry had
none. The woman who let him live in her house was too busy to attend to
him; so, when he was cold, or hungry, or tired, and wanted to lay his
poor, weary head in her lap, she had no time to let him do so. Dear
little fellow, it would have done him so much good to have some kind
mamma take him in her lap and squeeze him close to her breast, as mamma
does Frankie, and call him her darling, dear little Harry. I think he
would have stopped crying at once, and he would have looked up in her
face and smiled his thanks."

Frankie was so much pleased with the story, that he put up his little
mouth to kiss mamma; and when he had done so, he patted her face softly,
and said, "Patty love oo." He could not say "you."

"One day," said mamma, "a kind lady called at the poorhouse where Harry
lived. He was sitting on a little bed in the corner, crying; but he
stopped when the lady went in. His hair had not been combed for many
days; his face was very dirty where the tears had run down over his
thin, pale cheeks; his clothes were soiled and torn; but the lady pitied
him very much. When she found he had no mamma, and that his papa was at
work a great way off, she wrapped her shawl about the poor baby, and
took him home in her carriage.

"First of all she gave him a cup of milk to drink, and then she told
nurse to bring some warm water in a tub, and some soap and towels, for
she was going to wash the poor baby. She did not wonder then that the
poor little fellow cried, for he was all sore, because he had had no
kind mamma to wash him and put on nice powder. She kept him in the water
a long time, and washed him very clean; and then she told the nurse to
go up garret and bring a small trunk with some baby clothes in it. She
had a little baby once, and these were his clothes. Then she tried to
get the snarls out of his hair, and by this time Harry was so tired, he
was glad to go to sleep.

"When he woke up he began to cry again, for he thought he was back in
his old home; but as soon as he saw the kind lady, he smiled very
sweetly. He held out his arms for her to take him. She had some warm
bread and milk all ready, and she took him in her lap and put a towel
round his neck and fed him.

"He did not spit it out on his clean clothes, but he ate it all, and
liked it very much; and then he looked up in the kind face that was
bending over him so fondly, and smiled, and tried to stroke her cheek.
This was all the way he knew how to thank her for his good breakfast."

When mamma had told the story, she took Frankie's cup and began to feed
him, and he did not spit out one mouthful, but ate the whole, even the
last drop.




CHAPTER VIII.

FRANKIE'S DOLLY.


WHEN Willie was a little boy about two years old, a good lady came to
see his mother. Her name was Bryant, but Willie could not speak such a
very hard word; so, after trying a long time, he called her Bear. Papa
and mamma laughed heartily, and said that was a funny name; but in a few
days they began to call her Bear too; and after a while they thought it
was a very pretty name. Do you know why they liked it so much? Because
good Bear was fond of Willie, and very kind to him, and because Willie
said it in such a cunning way. One day mamma folded up a little blanket
for Willie to carry to bed for a baby, and Bear said, "I will make him a
pretty dolly, and dress it all up, so that he can have it to play
with."

That very day she began to work upon it. Mamma gave her nice pieces of
cloth, and she made a black face, and curly hair, and red lips, and a
very flat nose, and white eyes. Papa laughed when they showed it to him,
and said, "he hoped Willie wouldn't be afraid of it."

Then Bear made arms, and hands, and legs, with red shoes, on the feet.
Then she made a skirt, and a dress, and a sack for Dinah to put on when
she was cold, and a bonnet for her to wear when she went to walk. She
did not let Willie see it until it was all ready for him to play with,
and then she, and mamma, and nurse stood looking to see what he would do
with it.

"Pretty Dinah," said mamma, kissing the dolly, and then putting it into
Willie's arms.

At first the little fellow looked and looked, but did not touch his new
baby or smile at all; but presently, when mamma said, "Willie got two
babies," and putting the one made of a blanket by the side of it, he
began to understand what it was for. When Willie was four years old,
Bear made some new clothes for Dinah, a jacket and pantaloons, and
changed her name to John. This, Willie did not like; and one day hung
dolly by a string to the nob of the shutter, because he was not good,
he said.

When Frankie was old enough to play with a baby, dear kind Bear had gone
away where they could never see her pleasant smile again; but mamma made
a new dress, and put it on over the pantaloons, and called dolly Dinah
again. While she was sewing on it, the tears ran out of her eyes and
dropped on her work. Willie ran to ask her what was the matter, and she
said, softly, "I am thinking of Bear, my dear, and how she would have
loved our little Frankie if she had lived."

"I am going to heaven some day," said Willie; "and I'll ask her to come
back. I know she will, when I tell her you cry so."

"If we are good, my dear boy," said mamma, wiping her eyes, "and try to
please the Saviour, and to obey all his holy commands, we shall go to
live with her in heaven; but she can never come back to us."

"I'm trying to grow good every day, mamma," said Willie.

This was a long time before. Now Frankie loved Dinah dearly; and when he
went to ride, she had to go too. He used to hug her and kiss her just as
mamma did him; and in all his plays with Margie, Dinah was set up in a
chair, and had to play too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: All punctuation errors have been corrected.





End of Project Gutenberg's Little Frankie and his Mother, by Madeline Leslie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER ***

***** This file should be named 34830.txt or 34830.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/8/3/34830/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.