The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventh Regiment, by George L. Wood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Seventh Regiment
       A Record

Author: George L. Wood

Release Date: January 28, 2014 [EBook #44783]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVENTH REGIMENT ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have
been retained as printed.

Words printed in italics are noted with underscores: _italics_.

The cover of this ebook was created by the transcriber and is hereby
placed in the public domain.




THE SEVENTH REGIMENT:

A RECORD.


BY

MAJOR GEORGE L. WOOD.


NEW YORK:
PUBLISHED BY JAMES MILLER,
(SUCCESSOR TO C. S. FRANCIS & CO.,)
522 BROADWAY.
1865.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1865,

BY JAMES MILLER,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States, for
the Southern District of New York.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


The following pages were written for the purpose of making a permanent
record of the facts within the author's knowledge relating to the
Seventh Ohio Regiment. The work was undertaken with the belief that the
doings and sufferings of the regiment were of sufficient magnitude and
importance to entitle it to a separate record. It has been extremely
difficult to obtain facts, on account of so large a portion of the
members still being in the service. The book is, therefore, written
principally from memory. If it serves to perpetuate in the minds of the
public the hardships, as well as long and faithful service, of this
gallant regiment, then the object of the author is accomplished.

WARREN, _May, 1865_.




PREFACE.


This preface to the history of the Seventh Ohio Volunteer Infantry is
written at the request of the accomplished author of the book; but
without having read it, seen it, or heard its contents. I have,
however, such confidence in the ability, honesty, candor, good
judgment, and good taste of my old friend and "companion in arms,"
that, for myself, I take his work on trust, and in cheerful faith
commend it to others.

But was there a demand for another book on the war? Or were the doings
and sufferings of one regiment, among the thousands engaged in the war,
of such interest as to demand a separate history? These are questions
the author doubtless weighed carefully before he began to write; and
his answer to them is his book. I agree with him. This nation has a
deep, and will have a lasting, interest in the war. We have been making
history of unrivalled, perhaps of unequalled, importance to the world
during the past four years. We ourselves cannot comprehend the
magnitude of the work we have been doing, or, rather, that God has been
doing through us. The successful revolts of the Netherlanders against
the tyranny of Philip II.--of the Puritans against the tyranny of
Charles I.--of the republicans against the tyranny of George III.,
dwindle to insignificance (important as they were) in comparison with
the successful revolt of the loyal, Union-loving, freedom-loving
citizens of this Republic against the tyranny of treason and slavery.
It was a great fight for a great cause, and God has given us a great
victory. There was not a nation on earth that was not interested in the
conflict. Ay, it concerned our common humanity. All this will be seen
more clearly and felt more deeply twenty, fifty, a hundred years hence
than now. But to transmit and perpetuate the fruits of this victory we
must have records of the war--many records, made from many different
points of view, and of many kinds, great and small. The history of this
war is not yet written, perhaps cannot be successfully written for many
years yet. And that it may one day be written as it should be, every
regiment that has a story to tell should tell it. These regimental
histories will be invaluable to the Bancroft who, fifty years hence,
shall write the history of this war. The world is only beginning to
understand the true character and vocation of history--_to make the
past live in the present_; not in great pageants, not in processions
of kings, princes, and mighty conquerors, but _in the common every-day
speech and deeds of the people_. When Merle d'Aubigné would write the
History of the Reformation, he wrote to Guizot for counsel. Guizot
encouraged him, and counselled him to proceed, but added, "_Give us
facts, incidents, details._" This counsel chimed with the purpose
and genius of d'Aubigné, and the result was a history that, though
it discusses doctrines and themes commonly held to be dry and
uninteresting, has for old and young, and men of all classes, all the
charm of romance. In this, his "facts, incidents, details," equally
with his fascinating style, lies the charm of the histories of
Macaulay. But that historians may write such histories--that the
historian of this war may write such a history, the "facts, incidents,
details" must be on record. There is a demand, therefore, for another
book, for many other books, on the war.

In addition to this, every regiment of the grand Army of the Union in
this war has its own history, of peculiar interest to its own especial
friends. And I have faith in what Dr. O. W. Holmes once said: "I would
not give a fig for a man every one of whose geese were not better than
any other man's swans." To us of the old Seventh "all our geese were
swans." Whether others believed in us or not, we had faith in ourselves
and in one another; we were a mutual admiration society of a thousand
and odd men. And the fact is, that, for some reason, but what I cannot
say, the Seventh Regiment, from the day it was mustered into service to
the day it was mustered out, was always the pride and pet of Ohio, of
Northern Ohio especially. In this respect it never had a rival. True,
it was a well-disciplined, gallant, fighting regiment; but so were many
others. True, it had brave and accomplished officers; but so had many
others. True, it had in the ranks men of refinement, education, and
high social position; but so had many others. I am at a loss to account
for it, but the fact nevertheless was as I have stated it; and as its
deeds corresponded with its renown, _its_ doings, of all others, demand
a permanent record. And, if I am not mistaken, the reader of the
following pages who shall follow the Seventh from the day it was
mustered into service, in Cleveland, in 1861, to the day the pitiful
remnant of it, after tramping and fighting over almost half the Union,
were mustered out of service, in Cleveland, in 1864, will find in them
ample compensation for his time.

F. T. B.

CHICAGO, ILL., _May, 1865_.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

THE FALL OF SUMTER.--CIVIL WAR BEGUN.--PREPARATIONS BY THE SOUTH.
--NOBILITY.                                                        13


CHAPTER II.

THE PRESIDENT'S CALL FOR TROOPS.--ORGANIZATION OF THE SEVENTH.--
ITS DEPARTURE FOR CAMP DENNISON.--ITS REORGANIZATION AND DEPARTURE
FOR THE FIELD.                                                     19


CHAPTER III.

THE PURSUIT OF GENERAL WISE.--TYLER ORDERED TO MENACE GAULEY
BRIDGE AND THREATEN WISE'S COMMUNICATIONS.                         30


CHAPTER IV.

THE SKIRMISH AT CROSS LANES.--GALLANT CONDUCT AND FINAL ESCAPE
OF THE SEVENTH REGIMENT.                                           43


CHAPTER V.

REFLECTIONS ON THE SKIRMISH AT CROSS LANES.--BATTLE OF CARNIFEX
FERRY.                                                             56


CHAPTER VI.

CHARLESTON AND THE KANAWHA VALLEY.--A DOUBLE MURDER.--COLONEL
TYLER ASSUMES COMMAND OF THE POST.                                 63


CHAPTER VII.

FLOYD ESTABLISHES BATTERIES ON COTTON HILL.--DRIVEN OFF BY
THE FORCES OF GENERAL COX.--BENHAM'S FAILURE TO INTERCEPT HIS
RETREAT.--HIS PURSUIT.--SKIRMISH AT MCCOY'S MILLS.--HIS FINAL
ESCAPE.                                                            70


CHAPTER VIII.

REFLECTIONS ON THE INSTITUTION OF SLAVERY.                         77


CHAPTER IX.

THE SEVENTH ORDERED TO THE EAST.--EXPEDITION TO BLUE'S GAP.--
KIRMISH ON THE BLOOMING PIKE.                                      83


CHAPTER X.

GALLANTRY OF LIEUTENANT O'BRIEN.--DEATH OF GENERAL LANDER.--THE
SEVENTH ESCORT HIS REMAINS.--THE OCCUPATION OF WINCHESTER.         89


CHAPTER XI.

THE RECONNOISSANCE TO STRASBURG.--BATTLE OF WINCHESTER.--UTTER
DEFEAT AND ROUT OF JACKSON'S ARMY.                                 94


CHAPTER XII.

GENERAL SHIELDS' ANXIETY FOR LAURELS.--SUMMING UP OF THE BATTLE.
--LOSSES IN THE SEVENTH.                                          104


CHAPTER XIII.

PURSUIT OF JACKSON UP THE VALLEY.--MARCH TO FREDERICKSBURG, AND
RETURN TO FRONT ROYAL.                                            109


CHAPTER XIV.

THE MARCH ON WAYNESBORO.--TWO BRIGADES ENCOUNTER JACKSON AT
PORT REPUBLIC, AND AFTER FIVE HOURS' FIGHTING ARE COMPELLED
TO FALL BACK.                                                     114


CHAPTER XV.

BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN.--GALLANTRY OF THE REGIMENT, AND
TERRIBLE LOSS.                                                    123


CHAPTER XVI.

THE REGIMENT GOES INTO CAMP AT ALEXANDRIA, BUT IS SOON ORDERED
TO THE FRONT.--BATTLE OF ANTIETAM.                                134


CHAPTER XVII.

THE MARCH TO DUMFRIES.--SKIRMISH WITH HAMPTON'S CAVALRY, IN
WHICH THEY ARE BADLY DEFEATED BY A MUCH INFERIOR FORCE.           142


CHAPTER XVIII.

THE REGIMENT ORDERED TO THE FRONT.--BATTLE OF CHANCELLORSVILLE.   150


CHAPTER XIX.

ACCOMPANIES THE GRAND ARMY INTO PENNSYLVANIA.--BATTLE OF
GETTYSBURG.                                                       156


CHAPTER XX.

AFTER REACHING THE RAPIDAN IT GOES TO GOVERNOR'S ISLAND.--
AFTER ITS RETURN IT ACCOMPANIES HOOKER'S CORPS TO THE WESTERN
DEPARTMENT.                                                       160


CHAPTER XXI.

THE SEVENTH JOINS GRANT'S ARMY.--THE BATTLES OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN,
MISSION RIDGE, AND RINGGOLD.                                      164


CHAPTER XXII.

THE ADVANCE TOWARDS ATLANTA.--SKIRMISHING.--HOMEWARD MARCH.--ITS
RECEPTION.--MUSTER OUT.                                           170


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

  BRIGADIER-GENERAL E. B. TYLER.                                  185
  BREVET BRIGADIER-GENERAL J. S. CASEMENT.                        189
  BRIGADIER-GENERAL JOHN W. SPRAGUE.                              192
  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL SAMUEL MCCLELLAND.                           193
  MAJOR FREDERICK A. SEYMOUR.                                     196
  SURGEON FRANCIS SALTER.                                         197
  C. J. BELLOWS.                                                  198
  G. E. DENIG.                                                    198
  FREDERICK T. BROWN, D.D.                                        199
  CHAPLAIN D. C. WRIGHT.                                          205
  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL GILES W. SHURTLIFF.                          206
  COLONEL ARTHUR T. WILCOX.                                       207
  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL JAMES T. STERLING.                           208
  COLONEL JOEL F. ASPER.                                          210
  MAJOR W. R. STERLING.                                           214
  MAJOR E. J. KREGER.                                             215
  CAPTAIN J. B. MOLYNEAUX.                                        216
  CAPTAIN CHARLES A. WEED.                                        219
  CAPTAIN JUDSON N. CROSS.                                        220
  CAPTAIN JOHN F. S. CHUTTE.                                      221
  LIEUTENANT LOUIS G. DE FOREST.                                  222
  LIEUTENANT HALBERT B. CASE.                                     224
  LIEUTENANT HENRY Z. EATON.                                      226
  LIEUTENANT A. H. DAY.                                           227
  LIEUTENANT WILLIAM D. SHEPHERD.                                 227
  LIEUTENANT E. HUDSON BAKER.                                     229
  LIEUTENANT RALPH LOCKWOOD.                                      230
  LIEUTENANT T. T. SWEENEY.                                       230
  LIEUTENANT EDWARD W. FITCH.                                     231
  LIEUTENANT A. J. WILLIAMS.                                      231


OUR DEAD.

  COLONEL WILLIAM R. CREIGHTON AND LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
      ORRIN J. CRANE.                                             235
  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL MERVIN CLARK.                                291
  LIEUTENANT HENRY ROBINSON.                                      295
  LIEUTENANT E. S. QUAY.                                          296
  LIEUTENANT JAMES P. BRISBINE.                                   296
  LIEUTENANT CHARLES A. BROOKS.                                   299
  LIEUTENANT JOSEPH H. ROSS.                                      303
  LIEUTENANT FRANK JOHNSON.                                       304




THE SEVENTH REGIMENT.




CHAPTER I.

THE FALL OF SUMTER.--CIVIL WAR BEGUN.--PREPARATIONS BY THE SOUTH.--
NOBILITY.


On a gloomy day in April, 1861, the telegraph flashed the news over the
country that Fort Sumter, a fortress belonging to the United States,
had been fired upon by a body of rebels, and thus inaugurating all the
horrors of civil war.

By the great mass of people, civil war in our hitherto peaceful country
was entirely unlooked for. It burst so suddenly, that the entire
country was convulsed. The people had become so accustomed to clamor in
Congress and elsewhere, that they looked upon these threats to dissolve
the Union as mere bravado.

After the first clash of arms at Fort Sumter, both North and South drew
back in alarm, as if in fear of the coming storm. The Southern people,
however, better prepared by education for scenes of strife and
bloodshed, received the news of the inauguration of civil war with less
alarm than did those of the North. The latter received it with a
fearful dignity, conscious of the power to crush the rebellion. The
South, with that arrogance that becomes her so well, expected to make
an easy conquest. Long-continued exercise of power in national matters,
had taught her to look upon the people of the Free States as her
inferiors, needing but a master-stroke for their subjugation,--willing
to lay down their arms, and seek safety in dishonor. They had taken us
for a race of cowards, because we had given way to their selfish
demands in our public councils, for the sake of peace. To be sure, we
had some daring spirits in Congress who met these bullying traitors,
making them feel the full force of Northern valor. But these were
isolated cases, and won the respect of the Southern people to the
persons of the actors rather than to the North as a people. They looked
upon these spirited examples as rather proving the fact of our want of
chivalry than otherwise, and therefore were not corrected in their
false estimate of a people whom they were about to meet on bloody
fields.

One reason the South had for cherishing so mean an opinion of the North
as a military power, was on account of her having entirely neglected
the cultivation of the art of war. She had so few representatives in
the army and navy, that they were both almost entirely within the
control of the South.

This control the latter had exercised for years, until her people came
to look upon themselves as the only persons in the country fit to bear
arms. They flattered themselves that they were the army, and we but a
rabble, to be dispersed beyond the hope of reorganization at the first
clash of arms. But in this strife, like all others where aristocratic
privilege comes in contact with the freedom of democracy, these
arrogant lords were to meet with a bitter disappointment; they were to
be made to respect the strong muscle and brave hearts of the so-styled
plebeian North.

This avowed hostility of the South to the North had caused the former
to take a military direction, and forced her into a course of policy
which, however outrageous it might appear, was yet a matter of
necessity in her attempt at independence. The first step was to put
herself upon a war-footing. This she had been perfecting for several
years. The next was to get the Government so in her control as to make
it powerless in the incipient stages of the rebellion, that it might
gain sufficient strength to withstand the first shock, and thus gain
precedence.

During a period of thirty years the South was gradually assuming a
war-footing. The militia was organized; independent companies were
formed with no warlike object, as was generally supposed, but really to
resist any encroachment of the Federal Government upon what the leaders
deemed the rights of the Southern people. The election of Abraham
Lincoln to the presidency was not the cause of civil war, but only its
apology. There had existed in the minds of the Southern people a desire
for an independent government, which would give the aristocracy a
firmer footing. In other words, the Federal Government was too
democratic. But it was necessary that these conspirators have some
apparently good reason for civil war; else the people who were at heart
right, would desert them at a time when they were most needed. The time
for the inauguration of civil war was therefore most fitly chosen. The
people were made to believe that the inauguration of President Lincoln
was a sufficient reason; and thus the dream of thirty years of these
disunionists was at last realized. The apology for the war had been
substituted for its cause, and the mass of the Southern people made
eager to meet those on bloody fields whom they were led to suppose were
about to deprive them of their rights and precipitate them into ruin.

There is always a class styled the nobility in every nation. But the
true nobility in America is that class who have won that distinction by
noble deeds; who are great, not in titles and garters of nobility, but
in great achievements: not that class who base their right to that
title upon the number and character of human beings they may own. The
American people hold that distinction must be given to those by whom it
is merited; and that it cannot be the subject of monopoly. Each person,
however mean his birth, has the same right to enter the list for the
prize as he who was born of a higher rank. It is this freedom, which is
given to all, that has caused the Northern States to make such rapid
progress towards civilization and greatness; and it is the crippling of
this great principle that has cast a shadow over the enslaved South.
One great object of the leaders of the South had been to arrest the
rapid growth of the North, which, they were conscious, would one day
throw them into a helpless minority, for they could not themselves keep
pace with this rapid progress. Their ambition was to have capital
control labor, while the laboring classes were to be subservient to the
capitalists, and a sort of serfdom forced upon them. The wealthy class
were to live in luxury and indolence upon the unrequited toil of their
slaves. These facts, the leaders of the wicked rebellion, which they
were to inaugurate, were careful to conceal from their followers. This
was so well done, that the people of the South thought that these
imaginary wrongs of the Government, which had been pictured to them by
their masters, was the true reason of their attempt at separation from
the Union. It is hoped that the masses will soon see the difference
between serving a privileged class of aristocrats, and being members of
a free Republic.




CHAPTER II.

THE PRESIDENT'S CALL FOR TROOPS.--ORGANIZATION OF THE SEVENTH.--ITS
DEPARTURE FOR CAMP DENNISON.--ITS REORGANIZATION AND DEPARTURE FOR
THE FIELD.


On Monday, April 15, the President issued a call for 75,000 volunteers
for three months' service. The States responded immediately to this
call in double the number required. Never in the history of the world
was such a response witnessed to the call of any country. Men left
their implements of husbandry in the fields and rushed to the
recruiting stations. The executives of the States were pressed with
applications to raise companies and batteries under the call of the
President.

Under this call thirteen regiments of infantry were assigned to Ohio.
In fifteen days 71,000 troops were offered to Governor Dennison to fill
the quota of the State. Camps were now established at different points
in the State, and troops ordered to rendezvous. Camp Taylor, at
Cleveland, Ohio, was organized on the 22d day of April, and by the 27th
contained several thousand troops. Of these, the city of Cleveland had
three companies of infantry; Trumbull County, one; Mahoning County, one
company of infantry and a section of artillery; Portage County, two;
Lake County, one; Lorain County, one; Huron County, one; while the city
of Toledo was represented by an entire regiment. The latter part of
April these detached companies were formed into a regiment,
constituting the Seventh Ohio. It contained the right material for a
fighting regiment. The majority of its members were of a floating
class, fond of adventure, while many were of the best class. The
regiment, as a whole, combined rare military talent. Many of its
officers and privates were skilled in tactics; and those who were not,
immediately set themselves about acquiring the necessary information,
rather by practice than study; for, with some exceptions, it was not a
scholarly regiment. The members took too much the character of
adventurers, to indulge in close study or profound thinking. But for
practical purposes, I doubt whether the regiment had a superior in the
State. It readily acquired discipline while on duty; but while off
duty, its members were not over-nice in their conduct, seldom indulging
in sports that were absolutely wrong, but, at the same time, gratifying
that propensity for fun which characterized them through their entire
career. It contained no drones; there was no companionship in it for
such.

On a beautiful Sabbath in early May, as the morning, with its
freshness, was dispelling the damps and shadows of the night from city
and country, a regiment was seen passing down the streets of the city
of Cleveland. The sweet strains of music and the heavy tramp of the
soldiers alone broke the silence. There was nothing but this martial
bearing, which marked the carriage of the members of the regiment, to
distinguish them from the multitude which was hastening in the same
direction; for there were no arms and no uniforms. Each member was
dressed in his citizen's garb, and there was no attempt at military
evolutions. It was a simple march of determined men to the defence of
their country. Solemnity and a becoming absence of unnecessary
enthusiasm marked the occasion with sublimity and grandeur. The faces
of those brave men were saddened with the thought of the perils which
lay before them, and the endearments that were behind. They were
marching to perform a sacred trust, confided to them by their
countrymen. "This was the first march of the gallant Seventh." Arriving
at the depot of the Cleveland, Columbus, and Cincinnati Railroad, it
took a train of cars for Camp Dennison, where it arrived in the
afternoon of the next day. Here they were totally unprepared to receive
it, no barracks having been erected, although one hundred men had been
sent there for that purpose several days previous. The ground was
perfectly saturated with water from a three days' rain, and the camp in
what had been a cornfield. But notwithstanding these difficulties, by
sunset the regiment had constructed barracks, and were comparatively
comfortable. In a few days the companies began to drill in earnest, and
their advancement was correspondingly rapid.

On the 11th day of May the regiment was ordered to elect, by ballot,
three field-officers. The candidates for colonel were, E. B. Tyler, of
Ravenna; a former brigadier of militia, and James A. Garfield. The
former was elected. Garfield afterwards became colonel of the
Forty-second regiment, and, in command of a brigade, defeated Humphrey
Marshall in Kentucky, for which he was given a star. Captain W. R.
Creighton was elected lieutenant-colonel, and J. S. Casement, of
Painesville, major.

On the 13th day of May, the President having issued a call for 42,032
volunteers for three years, a meeting was held in the Seventh Regiment,
when all but one of the officers were in favor of organizing under this
call. The subject being brought before the regiment on the following
day, about three-fourths of the command enlisted for the three years'
service. Recruiting officers were sent home, and by the middle of June
the regiment was full. It was mustered into the three years' service on
the 19th and 20th of June.

The companies were officered as follows: Company A, O. J. Crane, captain;
A. C. Burgess, first-lieutenant; D. A. Kimball, second-lieutenant.
Company B, James T. Sterling, captain; Joseph B. Molyneaux,
first-lieutenant; H. Z. Eaton, second-lieutenant. Company C, Giles W.
Shurtliff, captain; Judson N. Cross, first-lieutenant; E. Hudson Baker,
second-lieutenant. Company D, John N. Dyer, captain; Charles A. Weed,
first-lieutenant; A. J. Williams, second-lieutenant. Company E, John W.
Sprague, captain; Arthur T. Wilcox, first-lieutenant; Ralph Lockwood,
second-lieutenant. Company F, D. B. Clayton, captain; John B. Rouse,
first-lieutenant; A. C. Day, second-lieutenant. Company G, F. A.
Seymour, captain; W. H. Robinson, first-lieutenant; E. S. Quay,
second-lieutenant. Company H, Joel F. Asper, captain; Geo. L. Wood,
first-lieutenant; Halbert B. Case, second-lieutenant. Company I, W. R.
Sterling, captain; Samuel McClelland, first-lieutenant; E. F. Fitch,
second-lieutenant. Company K, John F. Schutte, captain; Oscar W. Sterl,
first-lieutenant; C. A. Nitchelm, second-lieutenant. H. K. Cushing was
appointed surgeon, and F. Salter assistant surgeon. John Morris was
appointed quartermaster, Louis G. De Forest, adjutant, and Rev. F. T.
Brown, chaplain.

Camp Dennison was well calculated for a camp of instruction. It is
separated into two parts by the track of the Little Miami Railroad,
while the river of the same name flows along its border. It is situated
between sloping hills of some magnitude, in a slightly undulating
valley. In summer it is beautiful; in winter, gloomy.

Soon after being mustered into service, the regiment was reviewed by
George B. McClellan, then major-general of Ohio militia, commanding the
Department of the Ohio. Immediately after, we were ordered to join his
forces in the field.

Accordingly, on the afternoon of the 26th of June, the regiment took
the cars for Columbus, Ohio, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel
Creighton, Colonel Tyler having gone in advance. Arriving in Columbus
late at night, it was transferred to the Central Ohio Railroad,
arriving at Bell air in the afternoon of the succeeding day. It was
immediately ordered across the river to Benwood, a small station on the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, a few miles below Wheeling. Here the
regiment was, for the first time, supplied with ammunition. It encamped
on the common, after the pieces were loaded. Much fatigued by their
long ride, the men threw themselves upon the hard ground, and were soon
enjoying a sound sleep.

In the mean time Major Casement was superintending the transportation
of the baggage and supplies across the river to a train of cars in
waiting.

Here and there the dusky forms of men were seen grouped over the fires,
which were dimly burning, discussing the stories which were floating
about camp, with no apparent starting place, of ambuscades, masked
batteries, and other concealed horrors.

Early on the morning of the 28th of June, three trains of cars were
slowly conveying the regiment into the wilds of Western Virginia, where
war, in its madness, was to confront it.

It arrived at Grafton early in the afternoon, and taking the
Parkersburg branch of the railroad, it arrived at Clarksburg before the
close of the day, and encamped in the outskirts of the village. The
entire regiment occupied tents, which were looked upon with much more
favor than densely crowded barracks.

While encamped at this place, a stand of colors was presented to the
regiment, the gift of the Turners, a society of Germans in Cleveland.

Near thirty miles from the village of Clarksburg is the small hamlet of
Weston, then a notorious haunt for rebels. In the place was a bank, in
which the deposits, to the amount of about thirty thousand dollars,
still remained. The authorities were desirous of procuring this
treasure. The undertaking was intrusted to the Seventh. It was proposed
to surprise the town early in the morning, before any one was astir to
give the alarm.

In the afternoon of the last day of June, the regiment wound its way
through the village, across the river, on to what is called the
Clarksburg pike, leading to Weston. The clay was intensely hot, and the
men entirely unused to marching. At sunset but little distance had been
made, and all were much fatigued, but still the gallant band pressed
onward. Weary and footsore, it moved on till daylight, when some
considerable distance intervened between it and the village. Men were
beginning to fall out by the wayside, unable to proceed further. At
this unfortunate moment the river appeared in view, which makes a bend
to the road, about a mile from Weston. On the opposite side of the road
was a gradual slope of cultivated land, with here and there a clump of
trees. From behind one of these a man was seen to emerge, and being
taken for one of the enemy's scouts, the command was given to "fire,"
when several pieces were discharged, without injury, however, to the
object of their aim. A double-quick was now ordered, when the men,
unable to proceed with their knapsacks, scattered them along the road.

Arriving at the town the right wing made a detour to the left, while
the left wing made a similar one to right, deploying as they went. In
this manner the village was entirely surrounded. The first intimation
the citizens had of the presence of the military was the playing of the
"Star Spangled Banner" by the band stationed in the park. A guard was
placed over the bank, and a member of the regiment detailed to look to
the business.

The Union citizens were overjoyed at the presence of the Federal
forces. They prepared a breakfast for the entire regiment, and other
charitable acts, which attested their devotion to the Union cause. The
regiment encamped on the bank of the river, near the cemetery.

During the first days of our stay at Weston many arrests were made of
disloyal citizens, a few of whom were sent to Columbus, Ohio, to await
the action of the Federal Government.

At this time a small force, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Pond,
of the Seventeenth Ohio Volunteers, was besieged at Glenville, a small
village on the banks of the Little Kanawha, by a superior force of
rebels, under command of Major Patton, assisted by Captain O. Jennings
Wise. Companies H and B were sent to his relief. After a fatiguing
march of two days and one night they opened communication with Colonel
Pond, the rebels withdrawing at their approach.

Six more companies of the regiment arrived at Glenville on the
following day, Colonel Tyler being fearful that the first detachment
might meet with a reverse. Several other regiments arrived about the
same time, but left soon after.

During the stay of the regiment at this place, many scouting
expeditions were sent out; on which occasions many dangers and
hardships were encountered.

Just before our arrival at Glenville, a Union lady rode in the saddle
through the rebel camp, with the stars and stripes in one hand and a
pistol in the other, while she defied the rebel host. Being pursued,
she sought refuge in our camp, and finally accompanied the advance of
our forces to her home, with the proud satisfaction of seeing the old
banner once more planted on her native soil. During the progress of the
war she had suffered many perils. At one time she went to visit her
brother, who was concealed in the woods, for the purpose of giving him
food, when she was challenged by a rebel picket. She wheeled her horse,
and, by hard riding, escaped, the rebel bullets passing harmlessly over
her head.

Private Adams, of Company C, was wounded while on picket, being the
first casualty in the regiment produced by the enemy. About the same
time Captain Shurtliff had a horse shot from under him, while riding in
the vicinity of the camp, and within the Federal lines.

Some difficulty was experienced at this place in procuring supplies.
The regiment was fed for some time on corn meal and fresh beef. A mill,
however, was soon set in operation, and supplies of flour and meal were
furnished in abundance.




CHAPTER III.

THE PURSUIT OF GENERAL WISE.--TYLER ORDERED TO MENACE GAULEY BRIDGE
AND THREATEN WISE'S COMMUNICATIONS.


On the 11th day of July General Rosecrans, by order of General
McClellan, marched his brigade eight miles through a mountain-path to
the rear of the rebel force, occupying the crest of Rich Mountain,
commanded by Colonel Pegram. This movement resulted in the fighting of
the battle of that name. The rebels were completely defeated, and made
a precipitate retreat towards Carrick's Ford, where, on the 13th, they
were again routed, with the loss of their general.

In the mean time the rebel General Wise had occupied the Kanawha
Valley, with a few regular troops and a considerable force of militia.

The advance of this force extended as far down the river as Buffalo,
while numerous incursions were made by the rebel cavalry in the
vicinity of Point Pleasant, a village situated at the junction of the
Kanawha with the Ohio River.

To oppose this force General Cox was sent with a brigade of Ohio
troops. His main force passed up the river in boats, while a sufficient
force was kept on each flank to prevent surprise.

General Wise gradually retired at the advance of this force until,
arriving on the banks of Scarey Creek, he threw up some breastworks,
and awaited the approach of the Union troops.

While these movements were being executed in the valley, Colonel Tyler
was ordered to advance with a brigade by the way of Sutton, to menace
Gauley Bridge, and threaten Wise's communications.

On the 22d of July the Seventh Regiment moved out of Glenville, on what
is called the Braxton road, towards Bulltown, where it was to be joined
by Colonel Tyler with the Seventeenth Ohio, two companies of the First
Virginia, with Captain Mack's battery, United States Artillery, and
Captain Snyder's section of twelve-pounders, making a force of fifteen
hundred.

We arrived at Bulltown in the evening of the next day, meeting with no
resistance from the rebels, who were scattered in small parties through
this entire region of country. We had expected to meet with opposition
at the ford, on the Little Kanawha, some twenty miles from Glenville,
but with the exception of a small band of guerillas, who were very
careful to keep the river between ourselves and them, we saw no rebels.

It was not until the evening of the 25th that we broke camp, and then
to cross a range of hills only, into the valley of the Elk, where we
remained until the 27th of July.

At this camp we learned of a rebel force at Flat Woods, distant six
miles, in the direction of Sutton. On the 27th we moved out, in a heavy
rain, to attack their camp, but at our approach they fled in dismay.

We remained at Flat Woods till the following Sunday, when we moved on
to Sutton, a distance of ten miles.

Sutton, the county-seat of Braxton County, is situated at the base of a
high range of hills, on the right bank of the Elk River. The river is
crossed by a suspension bridge. Back of the village, and about two
hundred feet above it, is a fine table land, with a range of hills for
a back ground. This table land was to be approached only by a narrow
defile fronting the river, which was easily defended; for a battery
properly planted would command every approach for a mile around;
besides, the enemy would have to cross the Elk River under fire. Nature
had made the position a strong one.

The command, now swelled to about two thousand, encamped on this table
land, with the two companies of the First Virginia, and Mack's Battery
thrown forward across the river, to keep open the road in front.

The command at once proceeded to erect fortifications, Captain Asper
being sent to the front of Captain Mack's position on the Summerville
pike, with instructions to select a proper position, after which to
erect a fortification commanding the road. Finding a point where the
road makes a sharp angle, the captain constructed the work, which,
although of no account during the stay of the regiment at Sutton,
afterwards proved a good point of defence, when the wreak garrison
stationed there was attacked.

The second day of August, the regiment left Sutton, and crossing the
river again advanced towards Gauley Bridge. The day was one of the
hottest, which, added to the hilly nature of the country, made the
advance difficult. Both officers and men fell out of the line, unable
to proceed, being so oppressed by the heat, and wearied by the
difficult state of the roads. At night we had crossed but one range of
hills, and found ourselves in the valley of the Little Birch River, at
the foot of Birch Mountain. The following morning we again took up the
line of march, reaching the Great Birch River at early twilight, having
made but a few miles during the day.

In the afternoon we were joined by our chaplain, who, when we were at
Glenville, volunteered to make his way across the country with a
message to General Cox. And now, after an absence of more than two
weeks, on a perilous message, he was again with us, as fresh and
light-hearted as when he left for his daring enterprise. He joined us
by the way of Gauley Bridge, having been the first to make the trip.
Alone, through a country infested by murderous bands of guerrillas and
outlaws, he traveled more than a hundred and fifty miles. Before such
deeds of individual heroism, all but the grandeur and magnitude of
large battles fade into obscurity. In such single exploits there is a
stern, silent daring, that obscures the maddened bravery of a
battle-field.

From our chaplain we learned that General Wise had left the valley,
burning the bridge over the Gauley River, after crossing his command.
He had become frightened and fled. And thus the rebel general, who at
Charleston had said: "By G--, the stars and stripes shall never wave
over this town again;" on the Wednesday following exclaimed: "The enemy
are on us, why the h--ll don't you pack my wagon," and, taking counsel
of his fears, fled in dismay.

But let us return to the Seventh Regiment, which we left at its camp
near the Big Birch River.

On the morning of August 6, we broke camp, and taking a mountain road
arrived at Summerville on the following Wednesday, and encamped on
Addison Hill.

The country about Summerville is beautiful in the extreme. It is
slightly undulating, having more the appearance of an open country, or
in some respects a prairie, than of a valley between two very high
ridges. It is sufficiently rolling to hide the mountains which separate
the Gauley from the Elk River.

At our former camp we were surrounded by very high, precipitous
mountains, with large rocks projecting from their summits. After
passing over Powell Mountain, we came into the valley of the Gauley,
and after marching a short distance, entirely lost sight of these
mountains, over whose rocky crests we had, but a short time before,
pursued our slow and weary way.

The contrast between this camp and the one at Big Birch was striking.
Here we were reminded of Ohio, our native State, the one which had more
attractions for us than any other; while at the latter camp we were
constantly reminded of some lonely country, described only by the
novelist, and inhabited alone by robbers and outlaws. And yet, upon
this mountain region, nature was lavish with her charms. The scenery is
grand beyond description. Peak after peak rises, one above another,
until the tired eye arrows dim in its endeavor to trace the outlines of
the distant mountain, and seeks the beautiful valley, wherein to
restore its lost vision.

From the top of Powell's Mountain, the beauty of the scenery is lost
sight of in its magnificence. This mountain is the highest in Western
Virginia, and commands the finest view. The first time I ascended it
was on horseback. When near the top we struck into a bridle path, and,
urging our horses into a gallop, we were soon at the base of the
projecting rocks. Below, a lovely panorama was open to our view. The
side of the mountain, as well as the distant valley, seemed covered
with a carpet of green, for both were densely wooded, and in the
distance the foliage seemed to blend with the earth. We could see far
away into the smaller valleys, and from them trace the ravines, in
which the small rivulets make their merry descent from the side of the
mountain.

At last, tired of gazing at this beautiful spot in nature's varied
scenery, we again urged our horses forward, and, after partially
winding around the mountain, we were at the very summit of this mass of
earth, rocks, and herbage. We now obtained a view of the opposite side
of the mountain from which we had ascended, where beauty expands into
sublimity. We could plainly trace the course of the Kanawha River, as
on its banks the mountains rise higher, and are more abrupt, while
beyond they lessen into hills, and the hills waste into a valley. On
the side of the distant hills we could see an occasional farm, with its
fields of golden grain ready for the harvest. On the very top of this
mountain was living a family.

Notwithstanding their great height, these mountains seemed fertile; and
the farms are apparently as good as those in the valley. Springs
frequently make their way out of the rocks by the roadside. Water is
abundant in any part of these mountains, and springs more common than
in the valley.

Near the top of Powell's Mountain, in a kind of basin, is a very fine
farm. It is well watered, and well timbered, and quite fertile. The
owner lives and flourishes in this quiet home, and, I should say, is
quite as happy as if in a city. He has become accustomed to the
loneliness of his mountain retreat. The wild scenery has become
familiar--its very wildness has a charm. He is content with two visits
each year to the distant settlement. It is literally true that "home is
where the heart is."

Although this country was well supplied with provisions of every kind,
we were not allowed to appropriate any of it. The property of rebels
was considered sacred. The authorities were confident of putting down
the rebellion through clemency, and, therefore, were both ready and
willing to put our soldiers upon half rations, rather than incur the
ill-will of traitors. When prisoners were captured, they had what was
called an oath of allegiance administered to them, when they were
liberated, to again rob and plunder. Occasionally we captured a horse,
but it was invariably given up, on the owner taking this oath of
allegiance. In view of this moderate method of dealing with them, they
risked nothing in prowling about our lines, for they knew that they had
only to take this oath to procure an honorable discharge; while the
soldiers of the Federal army, if they stole but an onion to make a
piece of hard bread palatable, were subjected to the severest
punishments. Experience has finally taught us, that hard blows alone
will conquer a rebellion, and that to reduce a foe, starvation is quite
as good as the bayonet.

I do not know that any one was criminal in this early practice of
clemency towards rebels; it seemed rather to be a sort of national
weakness, growing out of the universal opinion that the rebellion was,
at the greatest, but a weak effort of a deluded people; and that
kindness, connected with a show of strength, rather than its exercise,
would induce them to return to their former allegiance. It seems to be,
at this day, of little consequence why this practice prevailed, or who
was responsible for it, as it has almost entirely ceased.

On the 11th day of August, Captain John W. Sprague was given a leave of
absence, to go to his home, and was intrusted with dispatches to
General Rosecrans. He was to proceed by the way of Sutton and
Clarksburg. When near the Big Birch River he was suddenly confronted by
a band of rebel cavalry, belonging to Colonel Croghan's Second Georgia
Regiment, who was not far from the spot, with his entire command. The
mail carrier and two dragoons, who accompanied Captain Sprague,
attempted to make their escape; only one, however, was successful; the
mail carrier receiving a mortal wound in the attempt.

Securing their prisoners, the rebel cavalry crossed the Gauley River,
and were soon out of reach of the Federal forces. An unsuccessful
attempt was made to rescue the captors; but infantry, of course, could
make but a fruitless attempt at recapturing prisoners in the hands of
well-mounted cavalry.

This occurrence spread a gloom over the entire camp. One of the best
officers of the regiment had been captured almost within our lines, and
borne away to a Southern prison, to endure the privations of prison
life, with the fond anticipation of seeing home and friends blighted
and withered. To be lost to one's country, within the prison walls of
her enemies, when the arm of every true patriot is needed in her
defence, is a sad fate.

I am not inclined to blame any one for this unfortunate occurrence,
though it may occur to the mind of the reader that good generalship
would require that the commandant of a body of troops, in the heart of
an enemy's country, should know whether or not the cavalry of that
enemy was hanging on his flank and rear. And then, again, it may be
urged with truth that the command was almost entirely without cavalry,
though it was furnished with one company, as well as one of Snake
Hunters, as they were called. The legitimate business in the army of
the latter was scouting. They had no other duty to perform.

But however these facts may be, yet true it is that a regiment of the
enemy's regular cavalry was not only hanging on the flank of our
column, but occupied our rear--thus severing our communications, and
cutting off our supplies.

On the 15th day of August we again moved forward, after first sending a
company down to Hugh's Ferry. We proceeded through a densely wooded
country, abounding in laurel and pau-pau, arriving at Cross Lanes, two
and a half miles from Carnifex Ferry, on the Gauley River, in time to
prepare our camp before night.

Soon after our arrival Captain Schutte, of Company K, was on picket
duty at Carnifex Ferry. During the day the captain, for some unknown
reason, conceived the idea of a scout across the river. Selecting
fourteen of his men, he crossed over to the opposite bank, and, taking
the main road, immediately pushed into the country. The march was made,
apparently, without any apprehension of the presence of an enemy; at
least, no steps appear to have been taken to prevent a surprise. All
went well, however, until the party had made a distance of several
miles, when, the first intimation they had of danger, they were fired
upon by a party of cavalry, concealed in an adjacent thicket, and all
but four of the party killed or wounded--Captain Schutte being wounded
mortally. The survivors conveyed him to an old building, and, at his
own request, left him. He expired soon after, and was buried on the
spot by the rebels. The four men fled towards the river, and, being
pursued, took to the woods. One, being separated from his companions,
was pursued to the bank of the river, and was only saved by throwing
himself into the stream from the projecting rocks. He concealed his
body under water, keeping sufficient of his face above to sustain life.
He could plainly distinguish the conversation of the rebels, and knew
by it that they were in search of him. Here he remained during the day,
and at night dragged himself upon the rocks. The next morning, tired
and hungry, he floated himself down stream by clinging to the almost
perpendicular rocks, until, arriving opposite a house, he was hailed by
a woman, to whom he made known his condition. She immediately
unfastened a canoe, and, paddling directly across the river to where he
was lying, half famished in the water, helped him over its sides, and
conveyed him to the other shore. Before they landed, however, the
rebels discovered them, and gave the order to "halt." It not being
obeyed, they fired, the bullets sinking harmlessly into the water. In a
moment the two were lost to view in the pau-pau, which lined the river
bank. The woman guided the soldier to her home, where she cared for him
during a short illness, which succeeded his escape. When he was
sufficiently recovered to join his command, he found the regiment had
abandoned Cross Lanes, which had been occupied by the rebel forces. He
returned to his former retreat, where he was concealed until the day of
the disaster to the Seventh, when, taking advantage of the confusion
into which the rebel forces were thrown during the affair, he escaped
towards Gauley Bridge, which place he reached in safety the following
day.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SKIRMISH AT CROSS LANES.--GALLANT CONDUCT AND FINAL ESCAPE OF
THE SEVENTH REGIMENT.


The occupation of Cross Lanes was considered by the authorities of the
gravest importance. It was contiguous to three fords on the Gauley
River, which, when possessed by the Federal forces, was a perfect
protection to the left of the army occupying Gauley Bridge. Carnifex
Ferry was immediately south two and one-half miles. There was a road
leading from the vicinity of Gauley Bridge, on the south bank of the
Gauley River, which unites with the Sunday road, crossing the river at
this ferry. This road afforded the enemy a means of gaining the left of
our forces, at Gauley Bridge. The occupation of Cross Lanes, therefore,
by the enemy, would sever the communication between our forces at the
above point, and the main army under Rosecrans, occupying the country
from the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, along Cheat Mountain.

Carnifex Ferry, was a point easily defended against a much superior
force. Indeed, it had so many natural defences, that it elicited
exclamations of surprise from men accustomed to the selection of places
for defence. The current of the river was rapid, while the abrupt rocks
on its banks afforded secure hiding places for a considerable body of
troops. It was quite impossible to bring artillery to bear in such a
manner on the position as to interfere materially with troops concealed
there. It seems to be the opinion of most persons familiar with the
place, that it would be quite impossible to dislodge a body of troops
properly posted on the north bank of the river at this ferry, provided
a stubborn resistance was made.

It was for the purpose of preventing the crossing of the enemy at this
point that the force of Colonel Tyler was ordered to Cross Lanes. By
keeping pickets well on the line of the river, to watch any advance of
the enemy, the regiment was entirely safe at its camp, from which it
was comparatively easy to re-enforce any portion of the line. But for
some reason, the commanding officer failed to visit the ferry in
person, until the afternoon of the day on which a peremptory order was
received to report with his command at Gauley Bridge. Hitherto he had
been entirely unable to give correct information, as to the probability
of his being able to hold the ferry. He was ordered to abandon the
position, because his dispatches were such, that they created an
uneasiness in the minds of Generals Rosecrans and Cox, as to the
propriety of trusting him to hold so important a position. Here was the
fatal mistake. A lesser error had already been made, in withdrawing all
the forces from Tyler, other than the Seventh. Had these forces
remained, the position would probably not have been abandoned, as all
would have felt secure. When the order to withdraw was received, the
commanding officer regretted it as much as any one. But the mischief
was already done; the order was imperative. On that evening, Monday,
the regiment left Cross Lanes at 11 o'clock P.M., and the next day, by
noon, was at Twenty Mile Creek, some eight miles from Gauley Bridge.

On the Wednesday morning following, Colonel Tyler reported in person to
General Cox. In the mean time, the general having become satisfied that
Colonel Tyler could be trusted to hold Cross Lanes, and being confident
that the contemplated attack of the enemy on Gauley Bridge had been
abandoned, ordered him to return as soon as the troops were rested,
expecting him to start back, at least the next morning. But Tyler did
not move. On Friday afternoon, General Cox, on learning that he had not
moved, was much excited, and said to an officer present--

"He must move; he must move at once; it is all important that Cross
Lanes be held, and Floyd be kept on the other side of the river; ride
back to camp and tell him from me, to move early in the morning, _and
with speed, to secure the position_."

The order was delivered in nearly the same language as given, but
notwithstanding its directness, he did not move till noon on Saturday,
and then made a distance of only fourteen miles, over good roads,
encamping at the foot of Panther Mountain, after having fallen back
from Peter's Creek, on learning of the presence of the enemy.

On arriving in camp, a dispatch was sent to General Cox, representing
to him that the enemy were in force in front, and asking instructions.
On Sunday morning at about 3 o'clock, a courier arrived with an order
from General Cox, substantially as follows: The force in your front
cannot be as large as you estimate it. Advance cautiously, feeling your
way; if the enemy is too strong, fall back, if not, occupy Cross Lanes
at once, as it is of the utmost importance.

About nine o'clock Sunday morning, August 25th, the regiment moved
towards Cross Lanes, casting lots as to which company should be left in
charge of the baggage. It fell upon Company F, which was temporarily
commanded by Lieutenant Kimball. The entire day was occupied in
reaching Cross Lanes. It was not until dark of that day that the
regiment went into camp.

In the days' advance some slight skirmishing occurred with the enemy's
cavalry videttes, but beyond these few horsemen no enemy was
encountered, the regiment encamping in apparent security near the
church, after having driven away a cavalry picket of the enemy.

Companies were sent out on picket, as follows: Company A, on the road
leading to Summerville; Company K, on the road leading to Carnifex
Ferry; Company C, on the road leading in the opposite direction, while
Company E was sent on a diagonal road leading to a ferry some distance
below Carnifex. The balance of the command remained near headquarters,
which were established in the church.

Each company on picket was divided into three reliefs, with
instructions to be vigilant.

The silence of the enemy, together with his neglect to attack, created
the impression that he had withdrawn his forces to the other side of
the river, fearing that this small force was but the advance of a
well-equipped army. But these theories were destined to fade into
sadder realities, as the shadows of night melted into morning.

Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the general repose. A
short time before day fires were kindled, and those who were up had
pieces of meat on sticks, which they were roasting. Some had obtained
green corn during the night, which they were also roasting. Before day
had fairly dawned, the command was almost entirely astir. As it became
sufficiently light to distinguish objects at a considerable distance,
several musket shots were heard in the direction of the river, followed
in quick succession by others. It soon became evident that a determined
attack was being made on Company K. About this time a column of rebels
was seen advancing from the river road, across the fields, towards
Company A's position on the Summerville road. Arriving in the vicinity
of this road, the column halted, formed in line of battle, at the same
time swinging round its right to the Summerville road, driving Company
A back to the point where the roads cross. In the mean time Companies
B, D, G, H, and I were ordered to the support of Company K; but on
arriving at the cross roads, Company K was seen falling back in some
confusion, before a superior force, therefore they remained at that
point. Meanwhile a heavy fire was opened from a dense wood opposite the
church, to resist which Company K, having been joined by Companies A
and C, which had advanced to its support on the ferry road, took
position on a hill midway between this belt of timber and the crossing
of the roads. From this point these companies delivered several
effective volleys, which soon drove the rebels from their position.
Taking advantage of this partial check of the enemy, Captain Crane
ordered a charge, which resulted in piercing the lines, and the capture
of a stand of rebel colors. The three companies now escaped, with a
loss, however, of Captain Shurtliff, Lieutenant Wilcox, and Lieutenant
Cross, taken prisoners, the latter being severely wounded in the arm.

During this time the rebel column from the direction of Summerville had
advanced so as to lap over the road opposite the Ferry road, exposing
the companies occupying the road in front of the church to an
enfilading fire, at the same time being exposed to a severe fire from
the front, from a column of infantry and cavalry coming up the Ferry
road. These companies were now ordered to rally on a hill near the
church. In executing this movement Companies D and H passed through a
corn field, exposed to a deadly fire from almost every direction. Soon
after reaching this field Captain Dyer, Company D, fell dead, pierced
in the heart by a rifle bullet. Lieutenant Weed succeeded him in
command. On reaching the hill these companies attempted to rally, but
being in an open field, combated by a much superior and partially
hidden foe, were compelled to fall back to a piece of woods skirting
the road. The balance of the command, other than those who had followed
the fortunes of Captain Crane, now joined them, and soon organized for
a systematic retreat.

Captain Crane and his followers, after putting some distance between
themselves and the enemy, crossed the Gauley road, and hastened to the
mountains, where they would be entirely free from the attacks of
cavalry, and where they would have a chance, at least, of partially
defending themselves against attack from the rebel infantry.

Arriving in the mountains, they took a direction as nearly as possible
towards Gauley Bridge, where they arrived in safety, meeting with
little of adventure on the way. Thus a small body of Federals had
fought their way out from the very grasp of the enemy, and, eluding
pursuit, traversed a mountain range, with no guide, over rocks and deep
gorges, arriving safely within the Union lines. Their arrival, however,
did little to cheer the hearts of those in camp, for they were a small
body compared with those still unheard from.

The news of the sad disaster to the Seventh had already been sent to
the friends at home; universal gloom had settled over the camp, and the
prospect looked dark for saving the organization, even, of a regiment
which was the pride of the Western Reserve.

A flag of truce was sent to Cross Lanes to ascertain, if possible, the
fate of those left behind. Chaplain Brown and Surgeon Cushing were
selected to undertake this enterprise. They, however, returned without
having accomplished their object.

One dark, rainy night, as if nature was in sympathy with the feelings
of those in camp, the band commenced playing a patriotic air in front
of the colonel's quarters, accompanied with cheers. I knew that this
indicated good news. Hastening to the spot I learned that a dispatch
had just arrived from Charleston with the comforting news that four
hundred of the regiment had arrived in safety on the Elk River, twelve
miles from the above place. But let us accompany these four hundred
heroes in their march from the battlefield.

Organizing the troops, Major Casement, being first in rank, Colonels
Tyler and Creighton having already escaped, assumed command. Losing no
time the detachment immediately took up the line of march. Avoiding all
highways, and keeping well in the timber, they moved on for some time,
when, considering themselves out of immediate danger, they ventured out
to the road, to find themselves only three miles from the place of
starting. It was now concluded that it was not advisable to attempt
reaching Gauley Bridge, as the enemy would be likely to interpose a
considerable body of troops between them and that point. It was
considered to be more practicable to make in the direction of Elk
River, and by this means reach Charleston. This course being adopted,
the command crossed the road and took to the mountains. Very soon after
a party of rebel cavalry came dashing down as if in pursuit, barely
missing the object of their search.

The command, aided by a compass, took their course over the mountains
in a direction which they supposed would ultimately lead them to the
banks of the Elk River.

During the afternoon Captain W. R. Sterling procured a guide, who
conducted them by narrow pathways, in which they were compelled to
march single file, towards a house which was situated at some distance
on the mountain. Night setting in, before reaching the spot, without
even a star visible to light them on the way, the column halted, and
passed the word back for a candle. The line extended for nearly half a
mile, and it was not until the last company, H, had been reached, that
one was procured. On its arriving at the front, it was discovered that
the head of the column had arrived on the brink of a deep chasm, into
which it would be sure death to plunge. One step more, and the unlucky
leader of the line would have been precipitated into the dreadful
crater. But these daring adventurers were spared the misfortune of such
an accident.

Two hours of valuable time having been lost, the line now pressed
forward, each man holding on to the man preceding him. About midnight
the house was reached, and the weary band laid themselves down; not,
however, to sleep, for the only provisions they had had during the day
was roasted corn, for in the morning they were attacked while preparing
breakfast, which they were compelled to abandon. The woman of the house
was kept cooking the good old-fashioned corn-dodger, and by morning the
command was tolerably well fed, and ready for the toilsome as well as
hazardous march of the succeeding day.

As the day again dawned, the line moved on. Procuring another guide
during the day, they arrived, in early evening, on the banks of the Elk
River, without any adventure worth relating. Before halting they forded
the river, which was, at the time, waist deep. Company B was sent out
on picket, under command of Lieutenant Molyneaux. The instructions were
to establish a chain of pickets, at short intervals, along the road
leading up the river. In case of an attack, the outer picket to fire
and fall back on the next, when another volley was to be delivered, and
so continue until the camp should be finally reached. The position
selected for the camp was at the base of a range of abrupt hills, which
were not accessible to cavalry, while many difficulties would present
themselves in the way of a force of infantry advancing to an attack
from that direction. The river ran at the very foot of these hills, too
deep to cross in the face of an enemy, and sufficiently wide to present
a decided obstacle in the way of an attacking party on the opposite
shore. The command felt, therefore, comparatively safe in this retreat.
As it afterwards proved, they were not mistaken; for it was ascertained
that, at the time the pickets were being stationed, seven hundred rebel
cavalry were a short distance up the river; indeed, they were so near
that a party of rebel officers heard the lieutenant give the
instructions to the outer picket. One of these officers, when
afterwards taken prisoner, being questioned by Molyneaux as to their
reason for not attacking, remarked that it would have been quite
impossible for them to reach the camp in case his instructions to the
picket should be carried out; and he and his brother-officers agreed in
the opinion, that the orders would be carried out; for no body of
troops, after having made so stubborn a resistance as at Cross Lanes,
would afterwards lose all by a want of vigilance or a disobedience of
orders. True it is that they did not attack, but suffered the camp to
remain quiet, and the command to move off at leisure in the morning.

A dispatch being sent to Charleston, on the following day a
provision-train met them twelve miles from the latter place. In due
time the command arrived at Charleston, weary and foot-sore from their
long and toilsome march.




CHAPTER V.

REFLECTIONS ON THE SKIRMISH AT CROSS LANES.--BATTLE OF CARNIFEX
FERRY.


The occasion for the affair at Cross Lanes was brought about by a
series of blunders. The first blunder was committed by the officer who
ordered all the forces, with the exception of the Seventh Ohio, from a
position which enabled them to guard the ferries of the Gauley. If it
was deemed important to hold these ferries at all, it was certainly
advisable to retain a sufficient force to guard against surprise and
capture. But then, what would be considered a sufficient force? To
settle the question, it is necessary to take into account the size of
the army occupying the country, as well as the size of that of the
enemy. Neither army was large, and both were much scattered, scarcely
more than a brigade occupying one position. A regiment, therefore, may
perhaps be considered a sufficient force for an outpost.

The army in Western Virginia was at no time sufficiently large to
accomplish any thing, under the best generalship, beyond simply holding
the country, and preventing invasion; and it was only for the want of a
moderately sized army that the rebel general failed to drive back our
forces. But the rebel authorities had no men to spare for the purpose
of winning barren victories; so the armies of Western Virginia were
left to watch each other, with an occasional skirmish.

At the time the affair at Cross Lanes took place, our army occupied a
front of many miles, as did also the rebel army. It was quite
impossible to collect, in case of emergency, more than about six
thousand men. But, however it may be as to the first point, it is
clear, secondly, that the commanding officer at Cross Lanes committed
an error in not making a personal inspection of the grounds, adjacent
to the camp, immediately on his arrival. It is always considered highly
important that those in command should know precisely the ground their
commands are expected to defend, and not to trust to chance or a battle
to develop favorable points of defence or attack. By reason of this
want of knowledge, rumors as to the presence of the enemy in force
created uneasiness and alarm, which was entirely natural, although
without cause. While in this state of feeling, the commanding officer
sent dispatches to Generals Rosecrans and Cox, which created the
impression that their author was not to be trusted to hold these
ferries. Those generals attributed this alarm to a want of personal
courage, they being well informed as to the strength of the position at
Cross Lanes. It was not, however, a want of courage, but simply a
failure on his part to understand the real strength of the position, by
reason of not having visited it in person.

When the order to withdraw came, Colonel Tyler regretted it as much as
any one; for he had that day examined the position, and knew that he
could hold it against any force the enemy could bring to the attack.
But this knowledge was obtained too late: lying on his table was a
positive order to withdraw. Reason said hold the position; military
law, which was higher in authority, said abandon it; so the place was
evacuated. The third and irremediable error was committed in not
returning to Cross Lanes when ordered. If that had been done, the
consequences resulting from the withdrawal would have been entirely
checked. The order to return was given on Wednesday, with the
expectation that it would be acted upon as soon as Thursday morning;
but it was not until the Saturday noon following that the command
started. There was no reason for this delay. The regiment had marched
but eighteen miles in as many days, and could, without any injustice
being done it, have returned the day the order was given. Even had the
command moved as late as Friday, with dispatch, it would not have been
too late, as it seems to be well settled that Floyd did not cross over
any considerable body of troops until Saturday.

In the way of criticism on this affair, it has been said that, had a
spirited dash been made on the enemy on Saturday evening, the rebels
could have been driven across the river. I think this claim subject to
many doubts. In my opinion a reconnoissance should have been made that
night, instead of falling back to Panther Mountain. This would have
resulted in the discovery of their position and force, and thus given
the command an opportunity to take advantage of the night to withdraw.
Had this been done, the ferry might possibly have been reached.

The result of these blunders was the fighting of two engagements, with
a heavy Federal loss, while the enemy suffered less. One of these,
Carnifex Ferry, has been dignified with the name of battle, while the
other is considered but an affair.

After the repulse of the Seventh, Floyd intrenched himself on the bank
of the river, near the ferry. About two weeks later, "Rosecrans came
down with his legions," comprising about four thousand men. Approaching
the vicinity of the ferry, he threw forward General Benham's brigade,
with no design of bringing on an engagement, however; but the line
unwittingly advanced to within a short distance of the enemy's works,
when a sheet of flame shot along their entire line. The unequal contest
lasted five hours, when the Union forces withdrew, hungry and
supperless, with a loss of fourteen killed, and one hundred and four
wounded. The loss of the enemy was about twenty wounded.

The troops awoke in the morning to find the rebel works abandoned. Thus
ended the battle of Carnifex Ferry, no less a blunder than Cross Lanes.

General Benham was censured for having attacked their main works, when
he was ordered to make a reconnoissance only. But when it is understood
that the commanding general sent up reinforcements, the blame, if there
was any, attached itself to him.

The loss to the Seventh, at Cross Lanes, was one killed, twenty
wounded, and ninety-six taken prisoners. Several of these were
recaptured at Carnifex Ferry, when Rosecrans attacked Floyd. Among the
number was Lieutenant Cross, Company C. The loss to the enemy has never
been known. There is no doubt, however, that it was considerable. They
attacked in large numbers, confident of an easy victory, therefore very
little caution attended their movements. But instead of a flag of
truce, accompanied by an offer to surrender, they were met by a shower
of bullets, which must have told fearfully on their heavy columns. The
fact that they were thrown into such confusion as to permit our men to
escape, shows that they were too severely punished to follow up their
victory.

The force of Floyd has been variously estimated: some having placed it
as high as six thousand; while, in his official report of the
engagement at Carnifex Ferry, Floyd himself places it at only two
thousand. His force was probably four thousand, of all arms, with ten
pieces of artillery. This entire force must have been in the vicinity
at the time of the affair at Cross Lanes.

The following is an unofficial list of the loss in the regiment:

_Killed._--Captain John N. Dyer.

_Wounded._--Corporal Frank Dutton, N. J. Holly, Thomas Shepley, Thomas
J. Scoville, Sergeant H. G. Orton, Joseph W. Collins, B. Yeakins, Lewis
J. Jones, Thomas S. Curran, William Meriman, B. F. Gill, William S.
Reed, David M. Daily, Robert J. Furguson, James R. Greer, E. J.
Kreiger, Sergeant James Grebe, John W. Doll, William W. Ritiche, Fred.
W. Steinbauer.

The following is a list of those taken prisoners:

Sergeant W. W. Parmeter, Sergeant E. R. Stiles, Sergeant G. C. C.
Ketchum, Sergeant F. F. Wilcoxson, Sergeant Edward Bohn, Sergeant A.
Kolman, Sergeant E. W. Morey, Corporal C. F. Mack, Corporal J. G.
Turner, Corporal T. A. Mohler, Corporal S. M. Cole, Corporal E. C.
Palmer, Corporal Charles Bersett, Privates Albert Osborn, Charles
Weber, Alex. Parker, R. Bears, L. Warren, A. M. Halbert, H. Keiser, S.
B. Kingsbury, E. Kennedy, A. Hubbell, C. C. Quinn, C. Burrows, E.
Evans, W. H. Scott, C. H. Howard, Charles Carrol, T. B. Myers, George
Sweet, John Massa, J. F. Curtis, W. E. Bartlett, W. Cherry, John Bark,
John Hann, L. M. Blakesly, Z. Fox, J. Butler, F. S. Stillwell, G. W.
Downing, G. C. Newton, William Biggs, Mathew Merkle, J. Sheloy, H.
Huntoon, G. W. Williams, George C. Robinson, H. Wessenbock, J. C.
Rafferty, J. Snyder, W. W. Wheeler, C. Haskell, J. W. Finch, James
Johnson, H. Johnson, L. C. Logue, A. Scoville, P. Wildson, F. Boole,
John Miller, P. Jenkins, John Smith, J. Wolf, Theodore Burt, A.
Schwartz, G. A. Akerman, Charles Sahl, G. W. Thompson, F. Williams, M.
H. Whaley, Z. Larkins, T. Hebbig, Z. A. Fuig, F. A. Noble, J. Hettlick,
J. McCabe, L. Beles, E. R. Smith, F. A. Rubicon, John Smith, E. Smith,
H. Smith, D. N. K. Hubbard, H. Wood, Charles Ottinger, R. S. Beel, N.
D. Claghorn, H. Thompson, N. Freidenburg, M. Levullen, S. Gill, fifer.




CHAPTER VI.

CHARLESTON AND THE KANAWHA VALLEY.--A DOUBLE MURDER.--COLONEL TYLER
ASSUMES COMMAND OF THE POST.


After the engagement at Cross Lanes, five companies of the regiment
remained at Gauley Bridge, while the balance were at Charleston. The
latter part was commanded by Colonel Guthrie, of the First Kentucky
Regiment. At this time it was the seat of justice for Kanawha County,
and contained upwards of three thousand inhabitants. It is a neat
village, situated on the north bank of the Kanawha River, at a point
where the Elk empties into it. There is a fine suspension bridge over
the latter stream, which the rebels undertook to destroy in their
flight. Charleston is three hundred and eight miles west of Richmond,
and forty-six miles east of the Ohio River. It was named after Charles
Clendenin, an early settler, and an owner of the soil on which it is
built.

The Valley of the Kanawha is famous for its beautiful scenery. The
mountains on either side of the river sometimes rise to the height of
five hundred feet and more, and are liberally supplied with rich beds
of minerals and coal. At their base is located the famous Kanawha salt
works. They commence near Charleston, and extend for about fifteen
miles above it. Before the rebellion they gave employment to nearly six
thousand persons. The following extract will be of interest:

"It is a curious fact, and worthy of philosophical inquiry, that while
the salt water is obtained by boring to a depth of from three hundred
to five hundred feet below the bed of the Kanawha, it invariably rises
to a level with the river. When the latter is swollen by rains, or the
redundant waters of its tributaries, the saline fluid, inclosed in
suitable "gums" on the shore, ascends like the mercury in its tube, and
only falls when the river returns to its wonted channel. How this
mysterious correspondence is produced is a problem which remains to be
solved. Theories and speculations I have heard on the subject, but none
seem to me to be precisely consonant with the principles of science."

Before the presence of the army interrupted the manufacture of salt,
these works yielded about two million bushels annually, and are capable
of yielding much more with an increase of capital.

While Colonel Guthrie commanded the post at Charleston a most
disgraceful tragedy was enacted. An order had been issued that no
liquors of any description should be sold or given to the soldiers or
employees of the Government. During the time this order was in force, a
party of drunken rowdies from the First Kentucky Regiment stopped at
the grocery of an old man, and asked for some beer; when refused, they
demanded it. Being again refused they threatened violence, and
proceeded to put their threats into force, when a son of the old man,
occupying a room above, was brought to the window by the old
gentleman's cries for help, and, seeing his father thus set upon by a
mob, from the repeated assaults of which his life was endangered, fired
a revolver, the contents of which took effect on one of the assaulting
party, producing instant death. He was at once arrested and lodged in
jail, around which a strong guard was placed to prevent his being taken
out and hung.

That night Colonel Guthrie, in a speech made to the excited throng,
which had collected around the jail, said, in substance, that the life
of the criminal should be taken if he had to do it with his own hand.
Similar remarks were made by others, among whom was a captain who
afterwards sat as judge-advocate on the trial.

On the morning after the affair the members constituting the
court-martial assembled "in all the pomp and pride of glorious war,"
decorated with all the paraphernalia belonging to an officer's
equipment, but to declare a prejudged opinion.

During the trial the prisoner was as immovable as a statue, evincing in
his appearance a want of hope, as well as a preparation for the worst.
He made no defence. The announcement of the sentence of death produced
no change; he preserved a stoical appearance to the last.

When the hour of execution arrived the prisoner was brought to the
gallows in a heavy wagon, guarded by a double file of soldiers, who
were laughing as gayly as if on their way to some place of amusement.
During the afternoon the sun had shone through a cloudless sky; but
just before this terrible scene was enacted, the heavens were draped
with heavy clouds, and the rain fell in torrents, casting a gloom on
all around. The wretched victim ascended the gallows with a firm tread,
and addressed a few words, in a fearless tone, to those assembled
around. As the rope was being adjusted around his neck, the crowd
involuntarily gave way, showing that, although they had been clamorous
for the enactment of the scene, yet when the time came, they had not
the nerve to witness the death-struggle of their victim. There was but
little movement of the body after the fatal drop fell. This last scene
was sickening in the extreme, and all of us, moved by a common impulse,
turned and walked away in silence, our hearts being too full for
utterance.

This is one more testimony against the safety and justice of the death
penalty.

On the 19th day of October, Colonel Tyler took command of the post at
Charleston. He issued the following proclamation:

    "In assuming the command of this post, one of my principal objects
    will be to maintain order, and to see that the rights of persons
    and property have the protection guaranteed by general orders from
    department headquarters. To the faithful execution of this my
    entire energies, together with the force at my command, will be
    given. To this end I have established Camp Warren, where officers
    and soldiers are required to be at all times, except when on duty
    which calls them away, or on leave of absence, which will only be
    granted at headquarters. Commissioned and non-commissioned officers
    will be held personally responsible for any violation of this order
    by members of their companies. Drunkenness, marauding, boisterous
    and unsoldierlike conduct are strictly forbidden. To prevent this,
    the sale of intoxicating liquors, directly or indirectly, to those
    in the service of the United States, is positively and emphatically
    prohibited; and I call upon the citizens to aid me in detecting
    those who violate this order. The quiet of your town, the
    protection of your property--in fact your lives and the lives of
    your families--depend much upon the sobriety of our officers and
    men; therefore, it becomes your duty as well as your interest to
    lend me your aid in the execution of this order.

    "E. B. TYLER,

    "Colonel Commanding Post."

Under the rule of Colonel Tyler the post at Charleston assumed order
and quiet. Under the former commandant drunkenness was common, while
marauding parties were free to patrol the streets on their errands of
mischief. The property of the citizens was at the mercy of these gangs,
while their lives were not unfrequently placed in jeopardy. The people,
therefore, were much gratified with the change of rule. Camps were now
established at some distance from the village, while no soldiers were
permitted to visit it unless they first obtained a pass from
headquarters, which, being established in town, was difficult to
procure. A provost-marshal was appointed, with a proper guard subject
to his orders. This guard was instructed to arrest all soldiers found
in the streets of the village without a proper pass, as well as those
committing any depredations on the property or persons of the citizens,
with or without a pass.

About the middle of October the companies at Gauley Bridge came down to
Charleston. During their stay on the Gauley they performed much duty at
the outposts; several times being under the enemy's fire, though none
were injured. The detachment suffered severe loss, however, from
sickness. Lieutenant Robinson was among the number; he died of fever;
his loss was greatly felt by the regiment. When the news of his death
reached his company, they wept as for a brother.




CHAPTER VII.

FLOYD ESTABLISHES BATTERIES ON COTTON HILL.--DRIVEN OFF BY THE FORCES
OF GENERAL COX.--BENHAM'S FAILURE TO INTERCEPT HIS RETREAT.--HIS
PURSUIT.--SKIRMISH AT MCCOY'S MILLS.--HIS FINAL ESCAPE.


Near the last of October General Floyd very suddenly appeared on Cotton
Hill, an abrupt eminence lying between the Kanawha and New rivers, at
the junction of the Gauley with the latter stream, which form the
Kanawha. The enemy immediately commenced shelling Gauley Bridge.
General Cox, who was some distance up New River, near the headquarters
of General Rosecrans, was ordered to proceed to Gauley Bridge and to
assume direction of affairs. He was also ordered to direct General
Benham, who was expected to arrive very soon with a brigade, to cross
his forces, at night, over the Kanawha River, and to carry the summit
of Cotton Hill by storm. A picket post had already been established
across the river by direction of General Cox. Benham protested against
the movement, and refused to execute the order received through General
Cox, but proceeded to confer, by telegraph, with General Rosecrans,
receiving in reply the same orders. Benham still protesting against
attempting to execute what he termed so hazardous a movement, at his
own request was permitted to pass down the river to the mouth of Loop
Creek, from whence he was to undertake a flank movement. Colonel Smith
joined General Benham in his protest, declaring the attempt to storm
these batteries as sheer madness. It is significant that General Cox
afterwards stormed and carried Cotton Hill, with barely a regiment of
troops.

Floyd had constructed a line of fortifications at Dickerson's, on the
road to Fayetteville, which was his only avenue of retreat in case of
disaster.

Soon after General Benham arrived opposite Loop Creek, he was joined by
five hundred selected men from the Seventh from Charleston. This
detachment of the regiment, having arrived on boats, was ordered to
disembark, and take up their position at the mouth of Loop Creek. The
following morning it moved up the creek some eight or ten miles, where
it took up its position at an old log barn. Lieutenant-Colonel
Creighton being in command, Colonel Tyler having remained at
Charleston, was instructed to picket the roads well in his front, as
well as the mountains lying between; and also to scout the country in
the vicinity, for the purpose of finding out the position of the camp
of the enemy, as well as his numbers. The latter part of the order was
well executed, and there can be no doubt that Benham was possessed of
accurate information of the enemy.

After the third day of our occupation of this position we were joined
by a detachment of the Forty-fourth Ohio, under command of Major
Mitchell, and the Thirty-seventh Ohio, under command of Colonel
Seibert. Soon after, all of this force, with the exception of eight
companies of the Thirty-seventh Regiment, was ordered forward under
command of Lieutenant-Colonel Creighton.

Proceeding for some distance on a road leading to the front, we struck
into a bridle path, and after passing through a wood, began ascending a
mountain. Single file, the command clambered up its steep and rocky
sides. Arriving on its summit we could see the heads of a line of men
extending for a mile beneath us. Descending the opposite side with some
difficulty, we marched some distance from the foot of the mountain, and
found ourselves at Cassady's Mills, a point from which the command was
to debouch on to the Fayetteville pike, should Floyd attempt a retreat.
But the movement, on the part of Benham, was so tardily executed, that
the balance of the command never arrived at this point; but instead,
the forces, other than the Seventh Ohio, were ordered away that night;
leaving a detachment of five hundred men, with no support, within three
miles of a well-equipped army of the enemy. We were so near that we
could plainly hear the bugle calls in Floyd's camp. Had Benham's entire
command been at that point, the retreat of the rebel army could have
been intercepted. Previous to this, Floyd had been driven back to his
intrenchments at Dickerson's, and all that was necessary to his
capture, was an attack on his rear on the part of Benham. But he either
feared to make the attack, or was too slow in doing it. The former is
probably true. That night the rebel general passed within three miles
of our position, and escaped with his entire army, together with the
artillery and baggage.

On the 12th of November, Benham arrived at Cotton Hill, but to find the
forces of General Cox in possession. On the afternoon of the 13th, he
pushed on after Floyd's retreating army, arriving within four miles of
Fayetteville, at about eleven o'clock P.M. Here, evidences of the
hurried retreat of Floyd began to multiply. The fences were lined with
hides, but recently stripped from the carcasses of cattle, while in
many places the beef itself was left suspended from the fence.

On the morning of the 4th, we pushed through Fayetteville before day,
in the pursuit. Floyd had but a few hours the start. Six miles ahead we
took breakfast, consisting of two army crackers to each man. After
which we pushed rapidly on. About noon, our skirmishers, the Thirteenth
Ohio, overtook the rear-guard of the enemy, when sharp firing occurred,
which continued during an advance of several miles, resulting in the
mortal wounding of St. George Croghan, colonel of the Second Georgia
cavalry, and formerly of the United States Army. The colonel was taken
to a house close by and left, where he was found in a dying condition
by our men. Having been a class-mate of his at West Point, Benham
stopped and passed a few words with him. When recognizing the general,
Croghan appeared to be much affected; and is reported to have said that
he knew he was fighting in a bad cause, and that he had been driven
into the army much against his wishes, for he was still attached to the
old flag. He soon after expired.

While this conversation was being carried on between officers so
differently circumstanced, the Union forces had pressed the rebels so
closely, that the latter, to save their baggage train, were compelled
to make a stand. The Seventh Ohio was ordered to act as reserve, but
when the action grew hot, was ordered forward, with instructions to
send out two companies as skirmishers, which was immediately done;
Companies A and K being sent forward.

About this time two pieces of rifled cannon were brought to bear on the
rebels, when they turned and fled, leaving six killed on the field. We
were so near, that we plainly heard the retreat sounded by their
bugles. From this time their retreat became a rout. In their flight,
they cast away every thing that would encumber their retreat. We were
now on the banks of a stream, over whose rocky cliffs numerous wagons,
with their contents, had been hurled. It was supposed, that several
pieces of cannon shared the same fate.

The pursuit was continued with much vigor, until a late hour in the
evening, when General Schenck, having but just arrived at the front,
ordered it discontinued. This was the second error of the campaign.
Schenck, with his fresh troops, instead of ordering the pursuit to
cease, should have pressed with vigor. The enemy encamped but a short
distance in our front, on Three-mile Mountain. This position could have
been carried with ease, with the combined forces of Schenck and Benham,
with comparatively little loss. But the pursuit being the result of a
blunder, resulted in a blunder.

A little after midnight the command fell back, arriving at Fayetteville
in the afternoon of the same day, after a fatiguing march over the
worst road that could be imagined, and with no provisions other than
beef with a very little salt. The Seventh marched to its old camp, four
miles out on the road to Cotton Hill. The officers and men lay on the
hill-side that night, exposed to a violent snow storm, with no other
covering than their blankets, except the snowy sheet that nature spread
over them during the long hours of night.

During the night a demonstration was made on a drove of pigs which were
lurking close by; and it would not be strange if the soldiers could
relate tales of their descent on poultry yards and bee-hives. True it
is, that some first-class honey found its way into camp.

The next day, marching over Cotton Hill, we arrived at our camp near
the mouth of Loop Creek. Embarking on the following day, we arrived at
Charleston on the 18th, after an absence of fourteen days.




CHAPTER VIII.

REFLECTIONS ON THE INSTITUTION OF SLAVERY.


While at Charleston, we were deeply impressed with the profound
interest the slaves were taking in passing events. That down-trodden
race, who had for years suffered every injustice at the hands of their
white oppressors, were now the first to assist the Federal commanders.
Through darkness and storm, they carried information, and acted as
scouts and guides on occasions when it would try the heart and nerve of
their white companions.

From my own observation, I am confident that the slaves of the South,
were just as well informed with regard to their relation to their
masters, as we were. They were, from the very first, impressed with the
idea that this rebellion was to work some great change in their
condition. They were watching, with great interest, every movement of
troops, and were continually asking questions, as to the disposition to
be made of them; thus evincing an interest in military affairs, of
which their masters little dreamed. It is well enough to talk of the
deep devotion of slaves to their masters; but the latter have found ere
this, I trust, that this devotion on which they have relied, has not
prevented them from cutting their throats, when it was in the line of
their duty, and by means of which they could gain their freedom. An
instance of this great devotion on the part of a slave for his master,
was related to me while at Charleston.

A Mr. R---- owned a colored servant by the name of John; he enjoyed the
unlimited confidence of his master, who was in the habit of trusting
him as he would one of his children. This confidence was reciprocated
by a like devotion on the part of the slave for his master. One day a
neighbor told Mr. R---- that his John was about to run away, as he had
repeated conversations with his servants on the subject. Mr. R---- flew
into a passion, feeling very much grieved that his neighbor should
think, for a moment, that his John, whom he had raised from infancy,
should prove so ungrateful as to leave him. The only attention he paid
to this timely warning was, to put still greater trust in his servant.
One day, shortly after this, John was missing; not only this, he had
been so ungrateful as to take his wife and three children. The last
heard from faithful John was, that he was safe in Ohio. Now Mr. R----
is a very good man and a Christian, and treat his servants very kindly;
but that God-given principle, a desire for personal liberty, actuated
him in connection with other men of fairer complexion. John,
undoubtedly, left his old home and master with regret, but home and
friendship, when compared with freedom, were nothing.

I was once told by a colored man, in whom the utmost confidence could
be placed, that there has been for years an association among the
negroes, which extends throughout the South, the purpose of which was
one day to liberate themselves from slavery. He said that hundreds of
slaves who, apparently, were as innocent as ignorant, were tolerably
well educated, and were secretly bending every energy to bring about an
insurrection, which should end in their being released from bondage.
When asked if the field-hands were members of this association, he said
they were; and although possessing less information than those living
in the cities and villages, yet they were aware of what was going on;
and after their work was done at night, they often met in their cabins,
and talked over the prospect before them. He also said, that in the
larger cities of the South this association had regular meetings and
officers; that they awaited only the proper time, when a tragedy would
be enacted all over the South, that would astonish the world.

When we reflect that revolts have been common in the South, and that
they have been attended by partial success, it does not require a great
stretch of the imagination to believe that this association did really
exist. The fact of the intense feeling of hatred cherished by the
people of the South against Northern fanatics, as they were termed, who
came amongst them, is strong evidence in favor of the existence of some
organized course of policy among the negroes. The outward appearance of
the slave is usually gentle in the extreme, although his inward
feelings may be agitated to such a degree, that in a white man they
would burst forth in the wildest passion. Therefore, this hatred of the
South to the opponents of slavery must be traced to a fear of some
secret organization, the object of which lay deeply buried in the
reticent minds of the slaves. The Southern mind was more deeply
agitated, from the fact of the want of this outward emotion on the part
of their slaves; for had this strong desire for liberty, which was
awakened in them, burst out in wild enthusiasm, it would have been
readily checked by the severe punishment of individuals; but it was
this secret working of this deep-laid desire for freedom that troubled
them. The most guilty were, to all outward appearance, the most
innocent.

While the Federal army occupied the country, the slaves were much less
guarded in what they said. One of these slaves, an old man, was passing
a tent one day, when a soldier said to him that he belonged to Jeff.
Davis. With a knowing look, he replied: "I did; but now, massa, I
belong to Uncle Sam." A colored woman, who had been a slave for years
(as she is very old), came into our room one day, and taking up a
paper, asked if we wanted it. Some one said to her, as she was about
leaving the room, that she had better not be seen with that paper, as
it was not the sort her mistress admired. Said she, "I know what missus
likes; I can take care of it;" and slipping it under her apron she left
the room. That slave could read and write, and yet her master knew
nothing of it. So it is with many others. It may be asked how they
acquire this knowledge. They gain it in a great many ways. Many of them
learn of their masters' children, with whom house-servants spend a
great deal of time. Having acquired a slight knowledge, it stimulates
them to greater exertion. They obtain scraps of newspapers and parts of
books, and thus gain a great deal of information entirely unobserved.
The slave knows how to keep secrets; consequently, any scheme that is
on foot is seldom discovered. Few persons, at the commencement of the
rebellion, had the least conception of the vast resources and power of
the slave population of the South. And it was not until they had fed
and clothed the Southern armies for two years, and by this means kept
them in the field, that it was acknowledged. Had it not been for its
slaves, the South, long ere this, would have been compelled to yield
obedience to the Government. The rebels appreciated and used this
element of strength from the beginning. The Federal Government, through
the influence of weak-minded politicians, rejected it; thus throwing an
element of its own strength into the hands of its enemies.

Notwithstanding this harsh treatment, the slaves proved true to the
Government; and finally, through the medium of this faithfulness, their
vast services were acknowledged, and they have not only been taken into
the private service of the country, but they have been admitted into
the army, to swell its numbers, until the strength of their mighty
arms, and the nerve of their fearless hearts, are felt by the enemies
of the country on every battle-field. What a glorious thought!
thousands of the oppressed fighting for the redemption from slavery of
a race which has ever worn the chain. When it is remembered that by
this strife questions are to be settled which have ever disturbed the
harmony of this country, and not that only, but questions which, when
settled, will release millions of our fellow-men and women from the
power of the oppressor, ought we not to be thankful that we are
permitted to make great sacrifices in so good a cause?




CHAPTER IX.

THE SEVENTH ORDERED TO THE EAST.--EXPEDITION TO BLUE'S GAP.--SKIRMISH
ON THE BLOOMING PIKE.


After Floyd was driven from Cotton Hill, very few rebels remained in
that portion of Virginia. Many troops were sent to Kentucky and
elsewhere. Among the number was the Seventh Regiment. It was ordered to
join the forces under command of General Kelley, which were operating
on the upper waters of the Potomac, with headquarters at Cumberland,
Maryland.

Accordingly, on the twelfth day of December, the regiment embarked on
steamers, and after paying its respects to General Cox, by way of
presenting arms and cheers, it moved down the river; thus leaving
forever the scene of its past dangers and privations. Little had,
apparently, been accomplished, during its summer campaign; but perils
had been braved, privations had been suffered, and obstacles had been
overcome. Many graves had been dug and filled with the pride of the
regiment. These were left as a record of its patient suffering in that
wild waste of hills. There was a sort of sadness attending the leaving
of all this for a new field of operations. But the soldier's life is
one continued change; and, therefore, he readily adapts himself to
circumstances.

At Parkersburg the regiment left the boats, and took a train of cars,
which conveyed it to Green Spring Run, a station on the Baltimore and
Ohio Railroad, sixteen miles from Romney, Virginia. Here it remained
without tents for several days, when it was ordered to Romney, to which
place it proceeded immediately. It was now given a good ground for its
camp, and furnished with Sibley tents, which were both warm and roomy.
The weather being very fine for the time of year, the health and
spirits of the soldiers rapidly improved.

During the occupation of Romney, quite a force of "bushwhackers" had
collected at Blue's Gap, which were under command of Colonel Blue. This
force of bandits had annoyed the Union citizens for some time. It was
finally resolved to break it up. The force chosen to do this work
consisted of the Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, and Eighth Ohio, Fourteenth
Indiana, and First Virginia, with Danver's two companies of cavalry,
and a section of Howard's Battery, in all about two thousand five
hundred men, under command of Colonel Dunning of the Fifth Ohio. A
little past midnight of January 6th, the force moved out from their
camp. The night was bitter cold, but the march was rapid; and just
after daybreak, the vicinity of the gap was reached, to find that the
rebels were tearing up the flooring of the bridge leading over the
stream coming through the gap. The skirmishers drove this force away,
and then advanced over the bridge, followed by the Fifth Ohio, which
took possession of Blue's house. Procuring a negro woman for a guide,
the force advanced to assault the rebel stronghold on the mountain. On
reaching the place, the intrenchments were handsomely carried, the
rebels standing for five rounds only, when they broke, and fled down
the side of the mountain. Their flight was so rapid that many of the
fugitives ran on to the Fourth Ohio, which was at hand, and were
captured. But they were hardly worth taking, for an uglier set of
ragamuffins the mountains of Virginia, or the whole world even, could
hardly produce. Blue's property was utterly destroyed. The loss of the
enemy in this affair was forty killed, and as many taken prisoners,
together with all their stores, wagons, and ammunition. A number of
cattle were also taken and driven back to Romney. On their return, the
Federals fired several houses, which was a lasting disgrace to all
those taking part in it. General Kelley was justly indignant at this
conduct.

Nothing further occurred to break the _ennui_ of camp and picket duty
until the 10th, when an order came to break camp and prepare for a
march. Immediately following this order, all was bustle and confusion,
in anticipation of an advance. There being a lack of transportation,
some tents and commissary stores were burned. In early evening, the
regiment marched into the town, where it was compelled to wait, through
a fearful storm of sleet, until midnight, when, instead of an advance,
the entire force rapidly fell back through Springfield to Patterson's
Creek, on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. This camp was soon converted
into a mud-hole. If all of Virginia had been canvassed a worse place
for a camp could not have been found. After a few weeks contest with
this everlasting snow and mud, an order came, on the 5th of February,
to march, which was hailed with universal joy.

The force passed down the railroad late in the afternoon, for a short
distance; when, leaving the tents and baggage, it took a road to the
right, and before night halted in a grove by the roadside. After a few
hours spent in preparing and eating supper, it moved off in the
direction of Romney, the Seventh in the advance.

All night we marched, over mountains and streams, through snow and
sleet. In the morning we came to a halt at an old tannery, and after
remaining through the day, fell back four miles and bivouacked on the
banks of the Little Cacapon River. Tired and wet, the soldiers lay down
to rest on their bed of rails and straw, to gather strength for the
morrow. At last, day dawned, rainy and gloomy, and the command moved
five miles to the rear, to a place called the Levels,--a very high
table-land, exposed to severe wind and storm, which never fails to
visit that region. The regiment was ordered to bivouac, and soon the
pine forest was converted into a village of green houses, with hot
fires roaring and crackling before them.

We remained here some fifteen days, within three miles of the tents;
but for some reason, better known to those in command, we were left on
a hilltop, exposed to the cold winds and snows of February, in brush
shanties. During some of the time it was so cold that a crust formed on
the snow sufficiently hard to hold up a person. During this time the
commanding officer of our brigade occupied a house close by, which was
very convenient as well as comfortable.

The regiment, while here, did very little duty; in fact none, with the
exception of one brigade drill in the snow, which only vexed the
command, without accomplishing any good.

Colonel Sprague, formerly captain of Company E, now paid the regiment a
visit, the first time he had met his old comrades since his capture.
Following that had intervened his long imprisonment. The meeting was a
pleasant one.

On the 13th of March the regiment left camp, and, taking the Bradford
pike, crossed a range of hills, at the foot of which is the Baltimore
and Ohio Railroad. Taking this road, Pau-Pau Station was reached before
night. Here we found quite a number of troops.

General Lander advanced with one brigade on the Blooming pike. Soon the
advance-guard, consisting of a part of a regiment of cavalry, came on
to an intrenched camp of militia. The general, taking command in
person, ordered a charge; but barely a dozen of these horsemen could be
made to follow their brave leader. But, nothing daunted, Lander,
followed by his staff and a few of the cavalry, dashed over the
intrenchments, when some fifty rebels surrendered; Colonel Baldwin,
their commander, giving himself up to Lander, after the latter had
seized him by the shoulder, despite the revolver which the rebel
colonel held in his hand.

On the return of this expedition, the Seventh was ordered out on to the
pike. After advancing for nearly two miles, it halted by the roadside,
where it remained in the mud and snow till the following afternoon,
when it went into camp close by.




CHAPTER X.

GALLANTRY OF LIEUTENANT O'BRIEN.--DEATH OF GENERAL LANDER.--THE
SEVENTH ESCORT HIS REMAINS.--THE OCCUPATION OF WINCHESTER.


During the occupation of the country about Pau-Pau Station, the troops
were kept active. Skirmishes were of frequent occurrence. One of them
is deserving of mention. A reconnoissance was being made by Lieutenant
O'Brien, of Lander's staff, accompanied by twenty or more cavalry, when
they were met by a band of rebels, who immediately fired a volley;
following which, they demanded the small party of Federals to
surrender. O'Brien, riding to the front, declined, at the same time
emptying the saddle of the foremost rebel with a revolver, which he had
in his hand ready for use. The lieutenant soon after received a fatal
wound in the shoulder, from the effects of which he died some weeks
after. Seeing their leader disabled, the Union cavalry hurried him to
the rear, at the same time presenting a determined front. When he had
arrived at a safe distance they fell back, fighting as they went. They
thus brought the gallant O'Brien safe to headquarters.

O'Brien was a writer of some note. Before the war he was a contributor
to several periodicals, among which was the Atlantic Monthly. For these
magazines he wrote many elegant things, which their readers will
probably remember.

On the first day of March, the monotony of life in camp was broken by
an order to march. We moved out of camp, followed by the entire
division, on the road leading to Winchester. Towards evening we crossed
the Big Cacapon River, and after ascending a spur of the Shenandoah
Mountain, filed into a grove of pines, and remained till the following
afternoon, when an order was given to fall back. On returning to our
camp, we found that the retrograde movement was occasioned by the
sudden death of General Lander. The brave soldier and able commander
expired while his troops were moving on an important position of the
enemy,--a campaign which his fertile brain had conceived, and which his
daring and dash were to put into successful execution. No wonder, then,
when the spirit of its leader took its flight, that the division was
recalled. None were found competent to succeed him in the command of an
expedition which had occupied his every thought while he had been
connected with the department.

On Monday, March 3d, the Seventh regiment escorted his remains to the
cars, in the presence of fifteen thousand troops, drawn up in line to
pay their respects, for the last time, to all that was left of a
commander whom they loved, and a soldier whom they admired. This slow,
sad march of the Seventh, to the strains of a solemn dirge, was
impressive. We returned to camp with the reflection that a master
spirit had taken its departure.

After the death of General Lander, Brigadier-General Shields was given
the command of his division. He arrived soon after.

The forces under General Banks, occupying the country in the vicinity
of Harper's Ferry, were ordered to make an immediate advance on
Winchester, General Shields was directed to co-operate in this
movement. He was ordered to move on Martinsburg, when General Banks
crossed the Potomac.

Early in March the division moved down to the railroad, when on the
same day it took the cars for Martinsburg. On arriving at Back Creek,
ten miles east of Hancock, the bridge was found to be destroyed. The
command now bivouacked, while a party was set at work repairing the
bridge. The work progressed so slowly, that on the 10th the command
moved on in advance of the train, passing through Martinsburg, and
encamping some two miles out on the Winchester pike.

On the following morning the column pushed vigorously forward to assist
General Banks in his attack on Winchester. The rebels, however, instead
of giving battle, fled as the command approached the city. Shields,
therefore, was ordered to encamp his troops before reaching Winchester.
The camp of the Seventh was about three miles north of the town, on the
Martinsburg road. The balance of the division encamped in the immediate
vicinity.

Winchester had for a long time been occupied by the rebels. The extreme
left of Beauregard's army, under command of General Johnston, had taken
possession of the place, when the rebel troops first occupied Virginia.
From this point, troops were immediately sent forward to occupy and
destroy the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, as well as to menace our lines
in the direction of Harper's Ferry and Cumberland. The possession,
therefore, of the place by the Union forces was of great importance. It
not only resulted in the protection of this very important railroad,
but so menaced the left of the rebel army as to require its commander
to detach a large force to the Shenandoah Valley, and thus materially
weakening his main army. Under a leader less able than Jackson, it
would have greatly taxed his energies to hold the valley. But under
this indomitable general the army was enabled to make a good show of
resistance to the advance of the Federal forces.

Winchester, the county seat of Frederick County, is seventy-four miles
west of Washington. The town is laid out in regular order, the streets
crossing at right angles. The place possesses some little of historical
interest. During the French and Indian War, Washington made it his
headquarters; and he also mentions it as one of the points which he
touched while on his mission to the French authorities on the Ohio
River. After the engagement at Great Meadows, July 4, 1774, Washington
returned to the place to recruit his regiment. It was also the base of
operations for the forces engaged in the reduction of Fort Duquesne.
During these wars a fort was built under the direction of Washington,
and named Fort Landon. A part of it is to be seen at this day. While
this fort was being constructed, Washington bought a lot in Winchester,
had a blacksmith shop built on it, and brought his own smith from Mount
Vernon to do the necessary iron-work for the fort. A well was sunk in
this fort to the depth of one hundred and three feet, the water from
which now runs over the top. The labor of erecting this fort was
performed by Washington's own regiment. The famous General Morgan, the
leader of the American forces at the battle of the Cowpens, is buried
here.




CHAPTER XI.

A RECONNOISSANCE TO STRASBURG.--BATTLE OF WINCHESTER.--UTTER DEFEAT
AND ROUT OF JACKSON'S ARMY.


Immediately after the occupation of Winchester, the enemy's cavalry
advance becoming troublesome, a plan was laid for its capture. Colonel
Mason, of the Fourth Ohio, was sent out on the road to Front Royal,
with a brigade, composed of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, with
instructions to proceed until he arrived at the last road leading to
the right before reaching Front Royal; which road he was to take, and
by it strike the rear of the enemy at Middletown, a small hamlet
equally distant from both Winchester and Strasburg. He was soon after
followed by General Shields, with six thousand men, who moved on the
direct road to Middletown. Colonel Mason's command, arriving at this
place in advance of Shields' column, encountered the enemy's pickets,
and drove them to Cedar Creek Bridge, which, having covered with
combustibles, they fired. When the troops of Colonel Mason arrived in
the vicinity, they were opened upon by a battery, to which they
replied; with no effect, however, as the distance was too great.
Shields coming up with his division soon after, the entire force
bivouacked for the night.

Early the following morning the command crossed the river without
opposition; but on arriving at Strasburg, the enemy opened fire from a
battery planted on a hill beyond the town. Shields, suspecting that the
entire force of Jackson was in the vicinity, made his dispositions for
immediate battle. The Seventh being ordered out on the road beyond the
town, were fired upon by a masked battery, but none injured. After
having been exposed to this fire for half an hour, it was withdrawn.
Soon after, our artillery was got into position, and after thirty
pieces of cannon had belched forth their fire, the rebels fled in
haste. During this fire, Mason's cavalry advanced so far out on the
road, that they were mistaken for the enemy by Captain Clark, of a
battery of regulars; he therefore sent a shell among them, with such
accuracy as to kill a few horses, and slightly wound one man.

An advance being ordered, the pursuit was continued for five miles,
when the command returned to Strasburg, and encamped for the night. On
the following morning it fell back to its old camp, the Seventh
marching twenty-two miles in seven hours, with but one halt.

This reconnoissance to Strasburg leaving no doubt on the minds of both
Banks and Shields that the enemy was not in the front in force, the
first division of Banks's corps, on the 20th, commenced its movement to
Manassas, in accordance with a letter of instruction from General
McClellan, of the 16th. General Banks did not follow this division
immediately, but remained at Winchester until twelve o'clock on Sunday,
the 23d, when he started for Harper's Ferry.

All this time Shields thought he was being trifled with by the rebel
General Ashby.

On Saturday, the 22d, there had been a good deal of firing in the early
part of the day, but what occasioned it did not seem to be well
understood, except to those engaged. But during the afternoon it was
thought prudent to make all needful preparation for battle, so as not
to be surprised in case it should prove that a greater force than
Ashby's was in front. Therefore the whole division was ordered up; the
third brigade, however, did not pass through the town. Shields went to
the front, followed by the first and second brigades. As these forces
emerged from the city, the rebel cavalry made a dash at the pickets,
who fled in some confusion through the little hamlet of Kernstown, but
rallied soon after, and by a well-directed volley of musketry emptied
several rebel saddles. This success enabled them to retire in safety.
The rebel cavalry soon after advanced, when a sharp skirmish ensued.
Our pickets having been re-enforced by several detached companies, were
enabled to maintain their ground. In the mean time the rebels opened on
our lines from a battery planted on an eminence; immediately after
which a Union battery wheeled into position, when a spirited artillery
duel took place. While directing the fire of this battery, Shields was
struck on the arm by a fragment of a shell, fracturing the arm, and
producing a painful wound. He, however, continued in the field for some
time after the accident occurred, but was finally taken to a house
close by, and his arm dressed, after which he was taken to town in an
ambulance.

The firing having ceased, the first brigade went into camp on the spot,
while the second brigade encamped in the rear. The third brigade filed
into an open field near where they were stationed during the operations
in front.

During Saturday night a strong picket was kept well out to the front,
while the remaining troops slept on their arms. Nothing occurred during
the night to disturb the several camps.

Morning dawned bright and pleasant. The stillness which rested over the
field of the previous day's operations, gave token of the intention of
the belligerents to respect the Sabbath-day. In view of the general
quiet, the second and third brigades were ordered back to their camp on
the Martinsburg pike.

It was nearly noon when the Seventh arrived, and before the men had
barely time to eat a hurriedly prepared dinner, it was again ordered
forward. This time the march was rapid. The distant booming of cannon,
induced many a disturbed reflection as to what lay before us. As we
passed through Winchester to the south, we emerged into an open plain.
This was crowded with people, as were also the house-tops. They had
assembled, apparently, for the purpose of seeing the Union army
defeated and crushed, and to welcome the victors into the city.

Arriving on the field, we found our forces occupying a commanding
position in rear of a range of hills overlooking Kernstown; while the
batteries, posted at intervals on the crest of these hills, were
maintaining a heavy fire on the right of the enemy's position, which
alone seemed to give evidence of any purpose to advance. The left of
our line was held by the Second brigade, Colonel Sullivan; while the
centre and right were held by the First brigade. Colonel Kimball,
commanding the division, was stationed on a commanding eminence, from
which several batteries were pouring their shot and shell into the
enemy whenever he showed himself within range.

Up to this time, the main fighting had occurred in front of our left;
but soon after a battery opened in front of the right, from a piece of
timber, which our batteries were unable to silence. It became evident,
from this, that the heavy skirmishing which the enemy had kept up from
their right was simply a feint, for the purpose of drawing the greater
part of our force to that part of the field, when a spirited onslaught
would be made on the other flank, which was expected to turn our right
wing, and thus give them the victory. It was a conception worthy the
genius of a Jackson, but it was entirely unsuccessful, as no troops
were sent to that part of the field beyond what ordinary prudence
required; but on the contrary, becoming satisfied of the intention of
the enemy, Colonel Kimball resolved to charge this battery. The work
was assigned to the Third brigade. Colonel Tyler, calling in the
Seventh, which had been supporting a battery from the time it arrived
on the field, formed his brigade in column, by divisions, and
immediately moved forward; at the same time changing direction to the
right, and passing up a ravine, shielded by a piece of timber which
skirted it on the side towards the enemy.

After arriving at some distance to the right, the column changed
direction to the left; and after a march of nearly a mile, it arrived
on the flank, and partly in the rear of the enemy. It had now reached
an eminence in a dense wood. In front, the battery which was the object
of our movement was playing vigorously upon the First brigade, to which
a spirited fire was returned by Robinson's Battery, which had wheeled
into position on the extreme right. This acted as a cover to the
movements of our brigade. Breathless, and with anxious hearts, we
awaited the return of our scouts, which would be the signal for a
plunge into the unknown. We were not kept long in suspense, for in a
few minutes the order was given to change direction to the left, and
the column moved forward, preceded by a line of skirmishers. After
marching in silence for some distance, the sharpshooters opened a
destructive fire on us from behind trees. We were immediately ordered
to charge; and, with a prolonged yell, the command, led by the Seventh
Ohio, swept like a torrent down the hill. A ravine now lay in front,
and, at a short distance, a slight eminence, and still beyond, a solid
stone wall, behind which, in three lines, nine regiments of the enemy
lay concealed. It was a fearful moment. The rebel artillery, in the
rear of this stone wall, had been turned upon the advancing column. The
grape and canister was tearing the bark from the trees over our heads,
while the solid shot and shell made great gaps in their trunks. Under
our feet the turf was being torn up, and around and about us the air
was thick with flying missiles. Not a gun was fired on our side. The
head of the column soon reached the ravine, when a deafening discharge
of musketry greeted us. A sheet of flame shot along the stone wall,
followed by an explosion that shook the earth, and the missiles tore
through the solid ranks of the command with a fearful certainty. The
brigade staggered--halted. With breathless anxiety we anticipated a
counter-charge by the rebels; but it came not. Victory to our arms
followed that omission on the part of the enemy. The order being given
to fire, the column recovered from the confusion into which it had been
temporarily thrown. The Seventh now advanced to the eminence beyond the
ravine; and, from a partial cover, maintained the unequal contest till
the other regiments could form and come to its support. The One Hundred
and Tenth Pennsylvania Regiment was thrown into such confusion, that it
was of little service during the remainder of the day.

An order was given to the Seventh to prolong its line to the left. An
attempt was made to execute the order, when the left wing, passing over
a fence into an open field, received such a well-directed fire as to
compel it to fall back to its old position.

During this part of the contest, the rebels endeavored to extend their
left, so as to flank us on the right. To meet this movement, Tyler
ordered the First Virginia to move to the right. Passing into an open
field, it was exposed to a cross-fire, which soon drove it back to the
timber.

The roar of musketry was now deafening. The dying and the dead were
lying thick upon the hillside, but neither army seemed to waver. The
confusion attending the getting of troops into action had ceased. The
great "dance of death" seemed to be going forward without a motion. The
only evidence of life on that gory field, was the vomiting forth of
flame and smoke from thousands of well-aimed muskets. From that blue
column, which rolled and tumbled in its ascent from the battle-field,
the unerring bullet sped on its errand of death. But other regiments
are seen coming to the rescue. The right wing of the gallant Eighth
Ohio takes position on the left, followed by the no less gallant
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Indiana, Fifth and Sixty-seventh Ohio, and
Eighty-fourth Pennsylvania. These regiments opened a heavy fire, which
was replied to by the enemy in gallant style.

The battle now raged fiercely until near night, when the enemy began to
show signs of giving way. At this the Union forces advanced a little,
at the same time delivering their fire with accuracy. As the shades of
evening deepened into night, the enemy began to fall back. At this
crisis, Colonel Kimball ordered a charge along the whole line, when the
retreat became a rout. In their flight, the enemy left in front of the
Third brigade two pieces of artillery and four caissons.

That night the Seventh bivouacked on the spot now made historic by its
gallantry. The wounded were being brought in all night long, while the
dead were lying in heaps around us, their increasing distortions and
ghastliness adding new horrors to the battle-field.

At early dawn the next day, we were ready to renew the work of blood
and carnage; but there was no occasion; the victory of the day before
was complete, the rebels had no desire of renewing the contest. They
gave the advancing column a few parting salutes from a battery, and
then beat a hasty retreat. We followed them that day to Cedar Run,
where just at night a slight skirmish occurred, with some loss to the
rebels. The following day the Union forces occupied Strasburg, when the
pursuit ceased.




CHAPTER XII.

GENERAL SHIELDS' ANXIETY FOR LAURELS.--SUMMING UP OF THE BATTLE.
--LOSSES IN THE SEVENTH.


After the battle of Winchester, General Shields showed a disposition to
appropriate the laurels won by others to himself. In a letter to a
friend at Washington, he claimed that, after the reconnoissance to
Strasburg, on the 18th, he fell back hurriedly, for the purpose of
deceiving the enemy into the belief that his force was small; and that
after arriving at Winchester, he moved his division beyond the town, so
as to create the belief in the minds of the citizens that most of his
force had been sent away. Now the fact is, this reconnoissance was
greatly the result of accident. The original design of it was to
capture the enemy's advance; this failing, the force proceeded to
Strasburg for the purpose of discovering whether or not the enemy was
in force in the vicinity. It was clearly shown by this advance, what
was afterwards well known, that nothing but a small cavalry force
occupied Strasburg, and that Jackson was some distance up the valley.
The hurried march of the division back to Winchester, was also the
result of accident. The command marched left in front, which brought a
regiment in the advance whose colonel cared little for the comfort of
his men; hence the rapid march. Shields reached Winchester in advance
of the command, having gone on before. After our return there was no
change of position, as our tents had not been disturbed, and we
reoccupied them as they were before leaving. If Jackson was deceived,
the credit of it is not due to Shields, for he was confident to the
very last that there was no other force in his front than Ashby. Even
as late as Sunday noon, when in reality the battle had begun, he
ridiculed the idea of Colonel Kimball calling for so many troops,
remarking, that "Kimball wanted more troops than was necessary for the
force in front of him." He also boastfully said, that "Jackson knew
him, and was afraid of him."

His friends tried to make it appear that it was by his direction that
the troops were manoeuvred on the field of battle. Now the fact is,
he was four miles away, and in such a condition from a wound that he
compelled one of the best surgeons of the division to remain with him
till long after the battle, against the request of the medical
director, who represented to him, in the most earnest manner, that the
wounded were suffering for the want of medical attention. In thus
retaining a surgeon for his own purpose, while the wounded were
suffering for medical aid, he was criminal in the extreme. He committed
an offence which ought to have deprived him of his commission.

Colonel Kimball was mainly instrumental in achieving the victory,
assisted, of course, by those under his command. The skilful manner,
however, in which the troops were managed was entirely due to him; and
the authorities regarded it in that light, for he was immediately made
a brigadier-general, as were both Tyler and Sullivan.

The number of rebel forces engaged in the battle of Winchester has been
variously estimated. They probably numbered sixteen regiments of
infantry, four full batteries of artillery, together with one of four
guns; in the aggregate, twenty-eight pieces and three battalions of
cavalry, under Ashby and Stewart;--in all, eleven thousand men. The
Union forces consisted of thirteen regiments of infantry, four full
batteries of artillery and a section; in the aggregate, twenty-six
pieces, and a battalion of cavalry;--in all, nine thousand men.

The rebel army was the attacking force, yet the engagement between the
infantry was on ground of their own choosing, by reason of the Third
brigade charging one of their batteries. It was in the vicinity of this
battery, which was at least a mile in advance of our selected line of
battle, that the fighting occurred which turned the tide of battle. At
this point the enemy had every advantage of position. He was securely
posted behind a stone wall, and in a belt of timber extending along a
ridge; while our forces were compelled to advance across a plain
exposed to a galling fire from infantry and artillery; and it was not
until they arrived within eighty yards of his line that any thing like
a fair ground could be obtained. Jackson, the famous commander of the
no-less famous "stone-wall brigade," a sobriquet it had obtained at
Bull Run, was fairly beaten; and that, too, by a force without a
general, and of inferior numbers. The victory was so complete, that the
enemy left two hundred and twenty-five dead on the field. Their killed
and wounded amounted to nearly nine hundred, while their loss in
prisoners was upwards of two hundred and fifty: adding stragglers and
deserters to these figures, and it will swell the number to about two
thousand. The Fifth Virginia rebel regiment was nearly annihilated:
there was hardly sufficient of it left to preserve its organization.

The loss to the Seventh was fourteen killed and fifty-one wounded: but
few were taken prisoners, and those by accident. The following is the
list:

_Killed._--Orderly-Sergeant A. C. Danforth; Corporal A. C. Griswold;
privates, Charles Stern, James Carroll, James Creiglow, Allen C. Lamb,
Stephen W. Rice, E. G. Sackett, Reuben Burnham, Louis Carven, Elias
Hall, John Fram, Fred. Groth, James Bish.

_Wounded._--Captain J. F. Asper; Lieutenant Samuel McClelland;
Sergeant-Major J. P. Webb, and Sergeant A. J. Kelly, mortally;
sergeants, A. H. Fitch, E. M. Lazonny; corporals, Ed. Kelley, William
Saddler, Geo. Blandin, William E. Smith, Benjamin Gridley; privates,
Fred. Hoffman, Daniel Clancey, Leander Campbell, Joseph Miller, Hampton
Gardner, Arthur Lappin, Thomas Fresher, Duncan Reid, Joseph Smith,
Albert E. Withers, Charles Fagan, O. H. Worcester, W. Coleman, Stephen
Kellogg, John Gardner, F. M. Palmer, F. A. Warner, Daniel Kingsbury,
Richard Winsor, John Milliman, John Atwater, Geo. Anness, Fred. Bethel,
Charles W. Minnick, Moses Owens, Arba Pritchell, Edward Thompson,
Edward E. Tracy, A. A. Cavanaha, S. Bishop, Owen Gregory, James Hunt,
W. McClurg, H. M. McQuiston, D. O'Conner, P. Tenny, Richard Phillips,
T. B. Danon, Wm. Birch, Henry Clemens.




CHAPTER XIII.

PURSUIT OF JACKSON UP THE VALLEY.--MARCH TO FREDERICKSBURG, AND
RETURN TO FRONT ROYAL.


About the 1st of April the command left Strasburg, under command of
General Banks, driving the rear-guard of the enemy through the little
village of Woodstock, and taking a position on the banks of Stoney
Creek, four miles beyond the latter place. It remained here until the
17th, during which time the enemy kept up an artillery fire across the
creek, which resulted in the killing of several men in the division of
General Williams.

On the morning of the 17th the command crossed the creek, and stormed
the enemy's battery on the opposite shore. The early dawn was
brightening up the eastern horizon with tints of red; and, as the
command emerged from the bridge, and ascended the steep hill beyond,
their bayonets glistened and sparkled. After firing one volley, the
rebels fled in haste, leaving the Federal forces to advance without
opposition. After falling back beyond the north branch of the
Shenandoah River, they made a stand, and endeavored to burn the bridge,
but were prevented by the Union cavalry. A flank movement being
ordered, and partly executed, the rebels again abandoned their
position. The Federals now pressed on to within a short distance of
New Market, where they encamped.

Here the command remained ten days, when it moved two miles south of
the town, and on the 3d of May advanced to within a few miles of
Harrisonburg, but on the following day fell back about five miles to a
good defensive position.

The tents were now ordered to be turned over to the quartermaster; and
on the following Monday we wound our way through Brook's Gap, in the
Massanutten Mountains, towards the smoky tops of the Blue Ridge, and
thus leaving forever the beautiful valley of the north branch of the
Shenandoah. Towards evening we crossed the south branch of the same
river at Columbia Bridge, and moved on in the direction of Luray,
encamping near that place. The next morning the command moved on down
the river until night, when it encamped. In the evening a hard rain
storm came up, which continued for several days. In early evening of
the following day the command reached Front Royal, a small village
situated at the base of the Blue Ridge, near the junction of the two
branches of the Shenandoah River. The following morning we crossed the
Blue Ridge, and immediately encountered the enemy's cavalry, which
annoyed us for several days. On the 17th we arrived at Warrenton, a
delightful village in Fauquier County. We remained in this camp until
Monday morning, when we again took the line of march for
Fredericksburg. We reached Falmouth, on the north bank of the
Rappahannock River, on the 23d of May. The corps of McDowell was in the
immediate vicinity, numbering thirty thousand men, and one hundred
pieces of artillery.

When we arrived on the Rappahannock, we learned that this force of
McDowell's, now numbering forty-one thousand men, was ordered down to
Richmond, to form a junction with the right wing of the grand army
under McClellan. There were then only about twelve thousand of the
enemy in front of Fredericksburg. It was about fifty miles to the
extreme right of the army in front of Richmond.

On Saturday the President and secretary of war came down for the
purpose of arranging the details. Shields' division was greatly in need
of shoes and clothing, while the ammunition for the artillery had been
condemned, and another supply, which had been ordered, had been very
much delayed. It was therefore arranged that the force should start
early on Monday morning, both the President and McDowell being averse
to starting on Sunday.

That evening the President and secretary of war left for Washington.
Very soon after, General McDowell received a telegram, to the effect
that Jackson was making a raid down the Shenandoah Valley, with a
prospect of crushing the forces under General Banks. Soon after this
dispatch, another arrived from the secretary of war, by order of the
President, containing instructions to send a division after Jackson.
Here was the fatal blow to the campaign against Richmond. McDowell
promptly ordered General Shields' division to move, and at the same
time telegraphed the President that it was a fatal blow to them all.

Little things control momentous events. Jackson's army of twenty
thousand veterans checkmated an army of one hundred and fifty thousand
men. In defending Washington, we lost Richmond; but Jackson risked his
own communication to break ours. Results more than realized his
expectations. Without risk there is little gain. Jackson adopted this
adage into his tactics, and endangered his army to save it. Events
proved his sagacity.

In time of war the capital of a country, unless far removed from the
seat of war, is in the way. The City of Washington was a fatality. It
stood between the army and victory. Jackson knew this, and profited by
it. When this general menaced Washington, our army let go its hold on
the Confederacy, to make it doubly safe. The campaign against Richmond
was abandoned, but Washington was endangered still. The valleys and
swamps of the Chickahominy were paved with the bodies of heroes--the
little rivulets were swollen with the best blood of the land--an army
of cripples were given to charity;--and for what? That the City of
Washington might be safe. We have since then fought the ground over
again from Washington to Richmond; another graveyard has been planted;
and this time for a purpose. Washington has been set aside by the new
commander, and Richmond made the objective point.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE MARCH ON WAYNESBORO'.--TWO BRIGADES ENCOUNTER JACKSON AT PORT
REPUBLIC, AND AFTER FIVE HOURS' FIGHTING ARE COMPELLED TO FALL
BACK.


Nearly the entire corps of General McDowell followed the division of
General Shields. The latter took the direction of Manassas Junction,
and from there passed down the railroad, through Manassas Gap, arriving
at Front Royal on Friday noon, after a sharp engagement with a small
force of rebels.

Soon after, Shields stationed one brigade on the Luray road, another to
watch the fords of the Shenandoah, another was sent out on the
Strasburg road, while the remaining one occupied the town. On
McDowell's arrival, Shields, with his entire division, was ordered out
on the road to Strasburg, for the purpose of intercepting the retreat
of the enemy. But, instead of taking the road which he was ordered to
take, he crossed over the north branch of the Shenandoah River on the
road to Winchester. It then being too late to repair the mischief, and
get ahead of Jackson, Shields was permitted to go in the direction of
Luray, and follow up Jackson as far as he thought advisable, with the
single instruction, that, in no event, should his division be
separated; so that each brigade would be in supporting distance of all
the others.

On the second day we arrived in the vicinity of Columbia Bridge, and
pitched our tents for the purpose, as we supposed, of enjoying a
night's rest; but towards evening an order was received to fall back
six miles. Arriving at this new camp, we again pitched our tents; but
just at dark we received an order to move forward to the camp we had
but just left. We arrived about midnight, and slept on the ground; thus
wasting the strength of the command in a needless march of twelve
miles.

On the following morning, June 7th, the Third brigade, by an order to
move on Waynesboro', took up the line of march, arriving in early
evening on the banks of Naked Creek, where it went into camp. Colonel
Carroll's Second brigade had passed over the road some time before.

The command had nothing but flour and beef for supper, and nothing for
breakfast on the following morning; but being assured that some hard
bread was in waiting, some six miles ahead, it cheerfully pressed
forward at four o'clock A.M., and at about two o'clock the same day,
reached the vicinity of Port Republic, where Colonel Carroll's brigade
had met with a repulse the day before.

Port Republic is situated at the junction of two forks of the south
branch of the Shenandoah River. Jackson's whole army was in the
vicinity of the place, the most of it occupying the west bank of the
river. In rear of Jackson's position, at Cross Keys, were General
Fremont's forces. At the latter place, on the previous day, Fremont had
defeated Jackson, with heavy loss to the latter.

Jackson having thus failed to beat back Fremont, was compelled to cross
the river at Port Republic, and, defeating Shields' command, pass
through a gap in the mountain to Gordonsville.

When General Tyler's command arrived on the field, Lieutenant-Colonel
Daum, chief of artillery, advised an immediate attack; but the general
wisely concluded to await the order of General Shields. Selecting a
good position for defence, the command bivouacked for the night.

Early in the morning of June 9th, the enemy was seen to debouch into
the plain in our front, when our artillery, under Captains Clark,
Robinson, and Huntington, opened a heavy fire upon him. This force
moved into the woods on our left, and passing up a spur of the Blue
Ridge, threw themselves rapidly forward, with a view of turning that
wing of the army. Two companies of skirmishers and two regiments of
infantry were sent into the woods to counteract this movement. The
skirmishers having become warmly engaged, two more regiments were sent
forward to their support. The enemy now abandoned his intention, and
coming out of the woods, swept across the field to our right, uniting
with a column which was advancing to the attack.

During this time, the Seventh was supporting a section of Huntington's
Battery. This new movement was directed against the position occupied
by it. When arriving within range of the guns, the enemy charged. The
regiment reserved its fire until the rebel column approached within
easy range, when, by order of Colonel Creighton, the regiment, which
had hitherto been concealed by the tall spires of wheat, rose to its
feet, and delivered its fire. This shower of lead made a fearful gap in
the lines of the advancing column. It staggered, and finally halted.
The Seventh now plunged into the midst of the foe, when an awful scene
of carnage followed. After a short struggle, the enemy was pressed
back, followed by the exultant victors. The Fifth and Twenty-ninth Ohio
regiments did gallant service in this charge. When the enemy had been
pressed back for half a mile, the column halted, reformed, and then
fell back to its old position.

The enemy now made a furious attack on the extreme right of the
division, to meet which the Seventh changed front on the Fourth
company. The enemy was soon driven back in great confusion, and with
heavy loss. Immediately recovering from this temporary check, he made
an onslaught on the centre, which resulted in his repulse, with greater
loss than in any previous attack; the Fifth Ohio alone capturing a
piece of artillery and many prisoners.

During these operations, the enemy sent a heavy column against our
left; and debouching from the timber, came down with such rapidity as
to overwhelm the small force of infantry supporting four guns of
Clark's Battery. This force, endeavoring to make a defence, came near
being captured. The guns, of course, fell into the hands of the enemy.
The Seventh and Fifth Ohio regiments were now directed to regain the
position. Moving by the left flank to the rear of the position under a
heavy fire, these two regiments dashed up the hill and over the guns,
into the midst of the terrified rebels. Five color-bearers had now been
shot down, while advancing as many rods. Lieutenant King seized the
colors and pressed forward, followed by the regiment, which sent volley
after volley after the fugitives, the firing ceasing only when the
rebels were covered by a friendly hill. We were soon ordered to drive
them from this position, which was done in gallant style, the command
charging up the steep sides of the hill, in the face of the foe.

A large column of the enemy was now seen advancing from the bridge to
the scene of action. It was therefore thought advisable by General
Tyler to withdraw from the field during this check of the enemy, and
before these re-enforcements could be brought into the contest.

This movement was executed under the direction of Colonel Carroll; and,
with few exceptions, the retreat was as orderly as the advance.

After falling back some miles, we met the balance of the command under
General Shields, who assumed the direction of the forces. Eighteen
miles from the battle-field, the command halted for the night; and, on
the third day, reached the vicinity of Luray, where it went into camp.

The importance of this engagement has been underrated. Great and
beneficial results to the Union army would have followed a victory; as
it was, a great disaster succeeded. The impetuous Jackson having thus
prevented McDowell's forces from uniting with the grand army, dashed
down in front of Richmond, and hurling his army against the right wing
of McClellan, gave the Federal army its first check, which finally
resulted in its overthrow. McClellan expecting McDowell, received
Jackson. Had the former formed a junction with him, the grand army
would have entered Richmond; but receiving Jackson, it entered
Washington. This failure to intercept Jackson was due to General
Shields' disobedience of orders. His entire division should have been
on the ground on Sunday, or none of it; and on its arrival, he should
have burned the bridge: then the capture of Jackson would have been
rendered probable, but, as events occurred, it was impossible. A part
of the division not being in supporting distance, rendered the burning
of the bridge a necessity; but Shields regarded it differently. His
order to save the bridge was the extreme of folly. To make himself a
name, he came near sacrificing his command. On Sunday, Colonel
Carroll's forces were in a position to have burned the bridge. Soon
after, the enemy commanded it, with eighteen pieces of cannon. Early in
the day it was safe to approach it--afterwards, madness.

This bridge in his possession, gave the enemy an opportunity to debouch
on to the open plain. When there, the advance of Shields' division was
liable to be crushed. The preservation of the bridge rendered it
certain that he would be there, because this plain lay between him and
safety. To avoid entering it, was to surrender. The shrewd Jackson
chose to enter it. When there, he turned upon Tyler, and overwhelmed
him; then moved off at his leisure. The defeat of Tyler was certain;
his escape, marvellous. Jackson anticipated an easy victory, but met
with a stubborn resistance. This mistake of Jackson saved Tyler.

When McDowell saw that the pursuit of Jackson was a failure, he
endeavored to collect his forces at Fredericksburg, for the purpose of
carrying out his original intention of joining McClellan; but Jackson
was there before him, and the grand army had been beaten back.

Had the forces of Generals Banks and Fremont been left to take care of
Jackson, and thus left McDowell with his 41,000 men free to go down to
Richmond, the labor of historians would have been lessened.

Soon after the battle of Port Republic, General Shields was relieved of
his command. This order received the approbation of both officers and
men.

The following is a list of killed and wounded:

_Killed._--Sergeant William Voges; corporals, Geo. R. Magary, Julius
Ruoff, L. R. Gates, John H. Woodward; privates, Adolf Snyder, Romaine
J. Kingsbury, John Mulligan, John Reber.

_Wounded._--Captain Geo. L. Wood; First-lieutenant A. H. Day; sergeants,
Virgil E. Smalley, Samuel Whaler, James R. Loucks (mortally), Chas. L.
King, Wm. Lanterwasser (mortally); corporals, Townley Gillett
(mortally), Holland B. Fry, Mark V. Burt, A. C. Lovett, Cyrus H.
DeLong, A. C. Trimmer, Charles Knox; privates, J. H. Burton, S. E.
Buchanan, Isaac Maxfield, Charles Keller, F. Keller, Edwin B. Atwater,
M. N. Hamilton (mortally), Daniel S. Judson (mortally), Wm. H. Pelton,
Benjamin F. Hawkins, Lawson Hibbard, James L. Vancise, John Atwater,
Jay Haskins, Leroy Chapman, Sylvester B. Matthews, Alfred W. Morley,
Lawrence Remmel, George K. Carl, Franklin Eldridge, George Geyelin,
John T. Geary, Ira Herrick, Marion Hoover, W. W. Rogers (mortally),
Edwin Woods, Morris Osborn, G. W. Parker, M. Eckenrode, D. L. Hunt,
William Frasher, Anthony Williams, John Smith, James Decker, Michael
Campbell, Philip Anthony, John Colburn, John Hummel, John Luetke, John
Schoembs, Conrad Sommer, John Voelker, Herman Fetzer.




CHAPTER XV.

BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN.--GALLANTRY OF THE REGIMENT, AND TERRIBLE
LOSS.


After a few days' rest at Luray, the regiment marched to Front Royal,
and soon after left for Alexandria, where it arrived on the 27th of
June. It went into camp on a beautiful hill, just outside the
fortifications.

Remaining in this camp for a month, the regiment was ordered to join
the forces under McDowell, at Warrenton. It arrived there on the
morning of June 26th, and soon after reported to General Banks, at
Little Washington.

General Tyler had now been relieved from duty with the Third brigade,
and General Geary placed in command.

As early as the 16th of July, the advance of Jackson's forces was at
Gordonsville; and by the 1st of August reached the vicinity of the
Rapidan River. To meet this movement, General Pope, commanding the Army
of Virginia, ordered forward the corps of General Banks; and on the 8th
of August ordered General Sigel's corps to Culpepper to co-operate with
Banks' forces; but Sigel, instead of moving promptly forward, sent a
courier to know what road he should take, when in fact there was but
one. This delayed the movement of his corps for several hours, so that
it was impossible to get it in position in time to render any
assistance to the forces under Banks.

On the 7th day of August, Crawford's brigade, of Banks' corps, had been
pushed forward in the direction of Slaughter Mountain, to support
General Bayard, whose brigade of cavalry was being driven back in that
direction by the enemy; and on the 9th, to support this movement of
Crawford, Banks was directed to take up a strong position a short
distance in his rear. Rickett's division, of McDowell's corps, was
posted three miles in rear of Banks' position, and within easy
supporting distance.

Desultory artillery firing was kept up all day on the 9th; yet General
Banks, apparently, did not think the enemy were in force, for, during
the afternoon, he left the strong position which he had taken, by order
of General Pope, and advanced to assault the enemy, believing that he
could crush his advance before the main body came up.

The enemy was strongly posted, and sheltered by woods and ridges; while
Banks had to pass over an open field, which was swept by the fire of
the enemy thus concealed.

The intention of Jackson, in this advance, was to crush a detachment of
Pope's army before the balance could come to its support. Banks, in
thus advancing to the assault, aided him in his design, which otherwise
would have been an entire failure.

Cedar Mountain, the position occupied by Jackson, is thus described:
"The mountain is one of remarkable beauty. At a distance of four or
five miles from its base it seems to rise like a perfect cone from the
plain below, and from its base to its summit scarcely a deflection is
to be observed in its outline form--a perfectly straight line, as if
nature had formed it in the same manner that school-boys form
sand-hills. The sides of the mountain are covered with a heavy growth
of timber: its summit is reached by a poor road. The height of the
summit is, perhaps, eight hundred feet above Cedar Creek."

Early in the day of the 9th, General Geary's brigade was sent to hold
Telegraph Hill, from which our signal-officers had been driven. To
approach this hill was sure slaughter; but the veteran brigade moved
on, through a storm of shot and shell, and occupied the position.

Thirty pieces of cannon on our side, and as many on the side of the
enemy, were belching forth their fire. There was no part of the Federal
lines but that was swept by this fire.

A little after three o'clock the Seventh Regiment was ordered over the
crest of the hill, into a cornfield beyond. While advancing to this
position, a most terrific cannonade was directed against it. It seemed
as if every cannon was being directed against this band of heroes; but
it never faltered in this march of death, moving coolly on, regardless
of the missiles that were tearing through its bleeding ranks. Comrades
were falling, and brothers dying; the mangled, bleeding victims of the
fury and violence of war were left thick, making the ground sacred on
which they fell; but the line wavered not. Reaching a low place, the
regiment halted, and the boys threw themselves upon the ground; and
thus for a long hour they lay, in an open field, exposed to a hot sun,
with a hail-storm of grape, canister, and shell falling thick and fast
around them. Men gave up their lives so gently, that it was almost
impossible to tell the living from the dead. The fatal missile struck
its victim, leaving the lifeless clay in the same attitude which the
living body but just before occupied. During that fatal period death
assumed a real character, while life seemed but a dream.

The engagement had now become general. The brigade of General Prince
had advanced on the left of Geary, occupying the prolongation of the
line. Artillery replied to artillery, musketry to musketry, bayonet to
bayonet, in this deadly strife. Daring warmed into rashness, and
bravery into recklessness.

About four o'clock the regiment was ordered into a meadow, which
position it promptly occupied, although the fire had not slackened, and
carnage marked its advance. After dressing the lines, the regiment
opened fire; and there it stood without a support, facing, in a
death-struggle, three times its number. The fiery Creighton received a
wound which compelled him to leave the field. The noble Crane was
disabled; and the brave Molyneaux, for the moment, took command. Seeing
the regiment nearly surrounded, and exposed to an enfilading fire,
which was fast thinning the ranks, he ordered it to retreat; but heroic
young Clarkey, mistaking it for an order to charge, dashed gallantly
forward, at the head of his command. After understanding the order, he
had barely time to fall back before the wings of the rebel host closed
in.

Slowly and sadly the remaining few of the regiment fell back, keeping
their faces to the foe. Only one hundred and sixteen, out of three
hundred and seven, returned to the rear unhurt; and many of these were
disabled from service by severe exposure to the intense heat of the
sun, and lack of water. The regiment retired to a hill, and was not
again brought into action during the afternoon. At night, however, it
was ordered out on picket. After advancing to Cedar Creek it was
challenged, and no one answering, it received a terrible volley from
the front and both flanks. It fell back to the cover of a piece of
woods, and finally to the rear, about a mile, where it bivouacked.

As night settled upon this field of carnage, Banks' entire corps
withdrew to the position it occupied early in the day; but the
artillery kept up an intermittent fire until near midnight. General
Jackson, from his mountain-top, could see every movement of troops, and
was enabled to calculate just how long it would take to re-enforce
General Banks. Had he not been so imprudent as to come down from his
mountain fastness, and attack the Federal forces after night, his loss
would have been comparatively little. But as Banks retired, he moved
twelve thousand men on to the battle-field, and kept them there during
the night; at the same time advancing one battery through the woods
into the open field beyond the battle-ground. From this position it
opened on the division of Union troops occupying the advance. As soon
as the first flash of his guns was seen, Major Davis, chief of
artillery in McDowell's corps, ordered two batteries into position, and
opened on the enemy. These batteries, being very close, and getting
good range, did fearful havoc among the rebels. It is said that General
Hartsuff sighted one of the guns that did the most execution. After the
battery had retired, Major Davis' guns shelled the battle-field. The
enemy being massed in small space, this fire told fearfully on their
ranks. After firing about one hundred shells, and the enemy not
responding, Major Davis ordered his guns silenced, little dreaming that
he had left more dead rebels on the field than all the random artillery
firing of the afternoon.

Many deeds of daring were performed at this battle. Captain Ash, of
General Pope's staff, riding up to a battery with an order from the
general to stop firing, saw that it was a rebel battery; he, however,
had sufficient presence of mind to give the order, and ride off. It was
obeyed; the battery ceased to fire, and soon after moved off. Captain
Ball, of McDowell's staff, did the same thing, and with a like result.

The following incident is from the pen of a correspondent of an Eastern
paper:

"Just after the firing of musketry became interesting, I noticed a
private soldier coming off the field, and thinking perhaps he was
running away to avoid danger, I rode up to him, when I found he had two
fingers of his left hand shot away, and a third dreadfully lacerated. I
saw at once that he had at least a hand in the fight. I assisted him to
dress his wound as well as my limited knowledge of surgery would
permit, he, in the mean time, propping up my pluck by his quaint
remarks. Said he: 'I don't care a darn for that third finger, for it
warn't of no account, no how; but the 'pinter,' and t'other one, were
right good 'uns, and I hate to lose 'em. I shouldn't have come to the
rear, if I had been able to load my gun; but I wasn't.' After I had
dressed his hand, he looked over in the direction of the firing, and
stood a moment. Turning to me, he said: 'Stranger, I wish you would
just load up my shooting-iron for me; I want to have a little
satisfaction out of them cusses for spilling my fore paw.' I loaded
his gun for him, and he started back for the top of the hill at a
double-quick, in quest of satisfaction. His name is Lapham, of the Ohio
Seventh."

During the action, General Banks was leaning against a tree, when a
cannon-ball struck it about eighteen inches above his head, passing
entirely through. It has been his singular fortune to meet with many
narrow escapes. While riding through Winchester, on his retreat before
Jackson, a rebel, from a window above, took deliberate aim at him, but
was shot by a private of a Massachusetts regiment before he could fire.

The loss to the regiment in this engagement was very heavy, and shows
with what determination it maintained the contest. It went into the
engagement with three hundred and seven, rank and file, and came out
with a loss in killed and wounded of one hundred and ninety-one,--a
loss of more than sixty-two per cent.

The following is the list:

_Killed._--Lieutenants, James P. Brisbine, Joseph Ross, Frank Johnson;
sergeants, C. P. Bowler, Moses Martin; corporals, J. J. Evans, D. W.
Wright; privates, Joseph T. Blackwell, William Adams, Edward Burnet, E.
S. Shepherd, Charles G. Hettinger, Charles Masters, Benjamin F. Gill,
H. F. Dinger, H. Hight, John J. Hensher, Henry C. Case, M. Eckenroad,
N. H. McClurg, C. C. Miller, G. B. Swisher, E. Fox, James Stephenson,
Alvin H. Benton, John Manning, Michael Waldof, James Ray, Frank Miller,
John Weeland.

_Wounded._--Colonel William R. Creighton, Lieut.-Colonel O. J. Crane,
Adjutant J. B. Molyneaux, Captain William R. Sterling; lieutenants,
Henry B. Eaton, W. D. Braden, S. S. Reed, Marcus Hopkins; sergeants, Z.
P. Davie, J. S. Cooper, J. C. Jones, A. S. Allen, Arvin Billings,
George W. Barnette, E. M. Lazarus, James R. Carter, E. G. Taylor, G. W.
Moore, Charles A. Brooks; corporals, M. D. Holmes, Henry J. Brown, L.
Wilson, Joseph Trotier, William E. Smith, Thomas C. Brown, Frank J.
Ware, Clark Wilson, C. H. Buxton, Norman L. Norris, F. A. Davis, Albert
A. Smith, James Alexander, Benjamin Gridley, W. T. Callors, Robert M.
Brisk, A. C. Trimmer, Christopher Nesper, James Grobe; privates, A. M.
Clinton, Thomas Sherwood, Edward St. Lawrence, Arthur Laffin, Leonard
Walker, Jacob C. Gaycly, F. N. Brund, Abraham Ginter, John G. Parsons,
Henry Hatfield, Andrew J. Crippin, Charles E. Preble, John H. Galvin,
F. Creque, Philip Kelley, T. Hammond, E. Lown, William Cammel, John
Boyle, James Dixon, Samuel E. Garden, Jacob E. Hine, Benjamin Hasfield,
Frank Henrickle, P. E. Hill, William L. Latch, Jacob Marks, Thomas C.
Riddle, John Stone, Ernest Zincker, Franklin Gaskill, N. Badger, George
Carrathurs, T. P. Dixon, Henry Fairchild, J. M. Rofflige, M. Richmond,
Theodore Wilder, Oliver Wise, A. Colwell, William Gardner, John Frank,
S. E. Hendrickson, N. R. Holcomb, E. Hobday, W. Lapham, F. Manley, John
McAdams, H. H. Rhodes, J. Harnner, Joseph L. Clark, James Kelley,
William W. Mecker, Charles Himpson, John Wickham, J. Roberts, J. R.
Green, Edward E. Day, Lewis Owens, S. A. Fuller, D. G. Burthroff, J. M.
Holcomb, Frank Strong, E. G. Meekins, H. Wallace, M. S. Gibbons, J.
Donthit, S. Reed, Arthur Adams, Ezra Brown, Ira M. Barlow, George M.
Caldwell, George W. Carter, John Downer, Thomas Ely, Sherman Collinger,
Stephen H. Hopkins, Daniel Jones, Perrin D. Loomis, David C. Nunemaker,
J. L. Oviatt, G. Russell, N. Twitchell, Ralph Winzenried, John C. Fox,
A. Inskeep, James Kincaid, John Lentz, R. D. Murray, John Pollock, E.
S. Mathews, A. Shaffer, C. Glendenning, Alfred Jackson, Hiram Deeds,
Ira S. Ray, Richard Freeman, Samuel Knap, John Fishcun, James A. Tell,
William Kelley, T. D. Williams, Charles Smith, George A. Earl, Maskell
Bispham, Frederick Michael, Henry Schmid, John Hammond, William Pfahl,
John Pike, George Sahl, George Zipp; George Rogers, musician.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE REGIMENT GOES INTO CAMP AT ALEXANDRIA, BUT IS SOON ORDERED TO
THE FRONT.--BATTLE OF ANTIETAM.


After the battle of Cedar Mountain, the regiment took part in the
memorable retreat of General Pope to the Potomac. During the time, it
was not engaged in immediate action; but was exposed, on several
occasions, to the shell from the enemy's batteries. After a fatiguing
march of sixteen days, it arrived, on the 2d day of September, under
the guns of the fortifications around Alexandria. On the following day
it was marched to Arlington Heights, to the support of Fort Albany,
near which it encamped in a beautiful meadow.

At midnight of the same day an order was received to have the command
ready to march at half-past eight on the following morning; but it did
not leave, however, until near noon, when, crossing the Potomac to
Georgetown, it moved off in the direction of Poolesville, bivouacking
at night five miles from Georgetown. On the following morning the
command started before day had fairly dawned, and passing through
Rockville, bivouacked at night near the place. On the 5th it moved
forward, and leaving the small village of Darnstown on the left, formed
in line of battle, fronting Poolesville, and awaited the advance of the
enemy; but he failing to appear in that direction, but threatening
Pennsylvania, by the way of Frederick, the command, on the 9th, broke
camp and advanced in five columns towards the latter city. After a
brief skirmish, the advance entered the place on the 12th. On the 13th,
the regiment crossed the mountains into Pleasant Valley to Middletown.
While descending the side of the mountain, the progress of the battle
of South Mountain was plainly seen. This engagement was fought by the
division of General Cox, of Reno's corps. These troops won great praise
for their gallantry and good fighting qualities; and the general, an
additional star.

On the 15th, the advance of the Federal army drove the enemy in the
direction of Boonesboro', and through the town towards Sharpsburg.
Generals Richardson's and Pleasanton's column of cavalry and light
artillery proved very annoying to the enemy in this day's retreat.

On the following day, the 16th of September, the rebel army took up its
position across Antietam Creek, and there awaited the approach of the
Federals.

[1]"This position consisted of a series of sharp points, rising from
the bank of the creek, and extending to the rear of Sharpsburg in a
succession of ridges; but, when viewed from a point a little in front,
has the appearance of table-land, the ravines being undistinguishable.
These points or ridges are for the most part surmounted by a heavy
copse of timber, which furnished admirable shelter for foot-soldiers;
while, with batteries flanking each hill, the position was all that a
general could wish for defence.

          [1] Charles Tenney.

"Seeing the strength of the position, McClellan sent Hooker's and
Sumner's corps around to the left of the enemy's advance position,
across Antietam Creek, and, ere the close of day, they had succeeded in
driving him fully a mile.

"We had lain down in line of battle, expecting to remain till the
morrow. The _tattoo_ had sounded, and an impressive silence had settled
upon the bivouac, broken only by the tread of the alarm-guard, as he
slowly paced his beat, and the occasional passing of an orderly,
conveying some order to be executed on the coming day. Not long were
we to rest. Our ears were soon assailed with--'_Attention, First
brigade!_' and we were soon in line, and moving around to the right,
to the support of Hooker and Sumner, where we arrived about one A.M.,
and bivouacked upon the ground held by the rebels scarce six hours
previous. An occasional shot or volley, in an adjoining piece of woods,
reminded us of the close proximity of the enemy. Nevertheless, the rest
of the night was passed quietly enough by us.

"The morning came, fresh and beautiful; but our _reveille_ was not
the rattle of the drum, nor the clear notes of the bugle. The day was
opened by a fierce volley of musketry, succeeded by another, and yet
another, which were soon so continuous as to be blended in one
unremittent roll. The struggle had commenced, and the sun that rose
shone upon a field already red with blood. Soon the heavy booming of
cannon was mingled with the sharp, crackling roll of small-arms, and
the din was terrific. Hooker was engaged, and hotly too. We were
immediately ordered under arms, and advanced in the direction of the
fight. Halting in easy supporting distance, we were given thirty
minutes in which to make coffee. At the end of this time the volume of
sound perceptibly increased, and was becoming nearer. The rebels were
re-enforced, and were slowly driving our men before them. 'Forward,'
shouted General Mansfield; and forward we went, in column of division,
as cool and regular as on drill. Changing direction to the left, we
advanced through a cornfield taken by Hooker the evening previous, and
which was now held by the rebels, having driven our boys back. An open
field lay before us, commanded by the direct and flank fire of the
rebel artillery, and the left flank of their infantry. Notwithstanding
the heavy fire we thus suddenly received, the advance was made
steadily, and in slow time. Arriving at the front, we deployed into
line of battle. The line now being complete, we advanced; _and the
work was begun_. No halt was made until the woods were ours; but the
enemy was to be dislodged from behind a rail fence. Then we occupied
the crest of the hill in the woods, and from this point we directed our
fire to the fence, where we could plainly see them level their pieces
at us, and fire.

"For an hour and a half we thus remained, and fought: one side with the
energy of despair; the other, with an energy imparted with the
consciousness of right and justice. The contest was fair and equal, and
the right triumphed. At last the line began to waver, and General Green
shouted, 'Charge!' With a yell of triumph we started, with levelled
bayonets; and, terror-stricken, the rebels fled. Like hounds after the
frightened deer, we pursued them fully three-fourths of a mile,
killing, wounding, and taking prisoners almost every rod. Their colors
fell: a private soldier leaped forward, and tore them from the staff.

"Across the fields we pursued the foe, who again took shelter in a
heavy piece of timber, flanked by their artillery. A battery of
twelve-pounder howitzers came to our support, and most efficient
service it rendered. We formed in two lines in rear of the battery, and
lay behind a low ridge, sufficiently high to protect from a direct
shot, but which offered no shelter from the fragments of shells
bursting near to and over us; these were continually striking amongst
us, often grazing a cap or an arm, but doing no particular harm. The
howitzers were doing splendidly, when suddenly we heard, 'But eight
rounds left!' Twenty more rounds would silence the rebel battery, but
we had them not. Soon the rebel fire was more rapid, and a yell in the
distance denoted an advance of their infantry. Shall we retreat? No! we
will hold our ground, or die! On they come, yelling defiantly: 'tis A.
P. Hill's division, second to none but Jackson's. We look anxiously for
another battery. It comes! It comes! We are safe! The gallant Eighth
Rhode Island Battery comes up in splendid style; our ranks open right
and left for them, the exhausted battery of howitzers wheeling out of
line. The Parrotts were unlimbered, and shell, five-second fuse, called
for, and they opened in glorious style.

"But what means that shout so closely on our right? They have flanked
us, and are charging our battery! A half right wheel was made, and we
were partially under cover of a narrow ridge. A portion of our front
rank, with the colors, advanced, and opened a fire upon their column,
but, as it was intended, it only drew them on; shouting fiercely, they
dashed forward, expecting to have an easy capture. We waited until they
were within six rods, when, with a yell such as freemen know how to
give, we rose and poured the contents of our rifles into the mass of
graybacks emerging from the woods. They reeled and staggered for a
moment, then rallied, and returned our fire for half an hour, then
wavered. Perceiving this, Lieutenant-Colonel Tindell, commanding
brigade, ordered a charge. As we started, they broke and fled in
confusion. Our brigade advanced to the woods, but was soon replaced by
a New Jersey regiment, which quickly broke and fled. On came the
rebels, yelling and exultingly waving their colors, across a field, and
entered a cornfield to the south, to flank our men who were engaging a
division. Their triumph was short, for they suddenly found themselves
nearly surrounded by General Franklin's troops, who came in from the
north and east, over the identical ground we fought over, and
precipitated themselves upon the flank of the enemy, six hundred of
whom threw down their guns and surrendered, those remaining fleeing in
dismay from the field.

"This _coup de grace_ closed the heavy fighting upon the right, and
we retired from the front, lacerated but cheerful, feeling that our
duty was faithfully performed, and knowing that the rebels were
defeated."

The next two days were occupied in burying the dead and collecting the
wounded.

On the 19th, the regiment left for Harper's Ferry, arriving at Maryland
Heights on the 20th. A few days after it forded the Potomac River, and
went into permanent camp on Loudon Heights.

The regiment sustained a loss at the battle of Antietam of five killed
and thirty-eight wounded. The list is as follows:

_Killed._--Sergeant James B. Carter; Corporal Martin Lazrus; privates,
John Bacon, Elbridge F. Meachum, George O. Sherick.

_Wounded._--Lieutenant Ernest J. Kreiger; sergeants, George A. McKay,
Jerry G. Clafflin, Isaac Jones, James Hansell; corporals, Edward
Goodsell, Henry H. Bailey, Hiram J. Bell, John F. Ely, Austin Bull,
James Bryant, J. Kurly; privates, George A. Wood, Joseph Kubler,
Laurine Lamphier, Pliney E. Hill, George Steinberger, E. C. Miller,
Daniel Weatherlow, David Everett, Alfred W. Mosley, Averett C. Reed,
Alson Coe, Alfred E. May, Thomas Woolf, Henry Wilcox, George Houck,
William Cromwell, Caleb Bryant, George Wandal, Nick Bauer, Charles
Briedenbach, Charles Graiter.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE MARCH TO DUMFRIES.--SKIRMISH WITH HAMPTON'S CAVALRY, IN WHICH
THEY ARE BADLY DEFEATED BY A MUCH INFERIOR FORCE.


While at Loudon Heights, the monotony of life in camp was relieved by
drill, guard, and picket duty, with an occasional reconnoissance. On
the latter occasions some little skirmishing would usually occur. An
occasional dash was made by the rebels upon the Union picket-line.

Soon after the occupation of this post the grand army crossed the
Potomac and Shenandoah into the Loudon Valley, on its way to
Fredericksburg. We copy a description of the march of a regiment in
Porter's corps.[2]

          [2] Lieutenant W. D. Shepherd.

"I have been thinking of the difference between soldiering that we read
about--fancy soldiering, glory and honor soldiering--and real
soldiering of the rough and tumble kind. How well it sounds to read: 'A
regiment of brave men marched proudly through the streets of Harper's
Ferry, to strains of sweet music. Gallantly the veterans of a dozen
battles streamed along, their banners gayly floating in the breeze;
they go to join the Army of the Potomac.' What is it when divested of
its trimmings? 'About three hundred and fifty of what once was a
regiment one thousand strong, went through Harper's Ferry to-day. In
vain the tum, tum, tum of the drum, at the head of the column, urged
the men to keep time. Wearied, worn out by continued tramping, loaded
down with their knapsacks, three days' rations in their haversacks, and
the prospect of a long march before them, slowly they dragged
themselves along; their torn and tattered flag, as well as soiled
clothes, giving evidence of hard service.' Again let us quote: 'At
evening they halted, and bivouacked for the night; refreshed and ready
at early dawn to continue the line of march.' Sift that a little--that
bivouac. Almost worn out with incessant and continued tramping through
mud, and muck, and mire, great clumps of which would stick and cleave
on to the shoe at every step, the night fast closing in, the column
halted; slowly the lingering mass closed up, stacked arms, and broke
ranks. Some, too tired to make a fire and cook food, threw themselves
on the cold, damp ground, and, with their blankets wrapped around them,
shivered to sleep; others, having eaten scarcely any thing all day,
threw off their cumbrous loads, and started, in the now dark night, in
search of wood and water. An old fire-scorched tin cup answers for a
coffee-pot as well as tea-kettle. Into it the water, muddy with the
feet of perhaps a thousand water-hunting tired ones, is put; and while
the coffee is boiling, a piece of fat pork is drawn from the haversack,
and a slice cut off; a long stick, pointed, on which the slice is
secured, and frizzling, sizzling, half burned, half cooked, ready when
the coffee is. The pork, coffee, and hard bread form, for the hundredth
time, the meal of the hungry soldier. Perhaps on the roadside, right in
the mud, glad in truth to lie anywhere, one after another drops his
wearied form. The heavy rain comes down in torrents, wetting him
through and through, but tired nature heeds it not--must have rest.

"Early dawn comes. Again the pork, coffee, and hard bread; and
the stiffened, sore, leg-weary patriot buckles on his saturated
knapsack, and, like a foundered horse, limps achingly along till
he gets heated up, with the same prospect before him of twenty miles
tramp--clamp--tramp."

On the 10th day of December the regiment left Bolivar Heights, crossed
the Shenandoah on a pontoon, and winding round the bluff of Loudon,
passed up the Loudon Valley.

While passing through Hillsboro', the command was given, by Lieutenant
Shepherd to his men, to "Close up!--get into your places!" General
Geary, on foot and unobserved, had marched along just in rear of the
company. Hearing the command, he remarked: "Well, here is a vacant
place, I guess I'll fill it up;" and stepped into the place. He
marched, in this manner, some distance, talking freely with those
nearest him, at the same time obeying orders promptly.

The regiment encamped about a mile beyond Hillsboro'.

Bright and early on the following morning the command moved on. Leaving
the battle-field where the brave Kearney fell, and Fairfax on the left,
on the 15th it arrived in sight of the Lower Potomac, and encamped
after crossing Naabsco Creek.

Having passed Dumfries on the 17th, an order came that the Fifth,
Seventh, and Sixty-sixth regiments, under command of Colonel Candy,
should march back and hold that post. On the following day, crossing
Powell's Creek, two hours' march brought the brigade in the outskirts
of Dumfries, where it went into camp.

Nothing transpired worthy of mention until the 27th of December, when
the heavy booming of cannon was heard in the vicinity of the
picket-line. It was evident that the enemy were making a descent on the
pickets. For several days this attack had been expected, therefore in a
few minutes the command was ready and in line of battle. The pickets
gradually gave way, under the command of the indomitable Creighton,
fighting their way back to the line of battle, in which they took
position. The rebels came gallantly forward, in anticipation of an easy
victory. When within short-range of our guns, they were met by such a
terrible fire of musketry from our partially concealed line, as to
check their advance. They, however, rallied, and returned the fire; but
in a moment staggered, and finally withdrew in confusion from the
field. Again forming their broken columns, they hurled themselves
against our line. They were again met by a determined front, and, with
a like result, were sent, broken and mangled, back upon their reserves.
A third time reforming their wasted ranks, they came down with great
impetuosity, and hurled their solid columns against the weak lines of
the Federals. They were again met with a sheet of flame, which sent up
its column of blue smoke along the entire front. For a moment it was
impossible to tell the effect produced on the rebels; but the smoke
clearing away before a light breeze, it was discovered that their
advance had been arrested. One more united effort, and the rebel line
was again sent back crushed and bleeding. They again organized for a
last desperate charge, and most gallantly did they sweep down upon our
line. Up the hill and over the brush and logs, which lay in their way,
with wild impetuosity, which threatened to crush every thing before
them. Aware of the avalanche that was sweeping down upon them, the
Union boys hugged the ground, awaiting, with breathless anxiety, the
command to fire. At last the stentorian voice of the sturdy Crane was
heard to shout the order, when a band of patriots, their eyes kindled
to a blaze with the ardor of their daring, with strong muscles and
steady nerves, rose, and with a shout that made the gray hills of old
Dumfries echo, poured a volley of death into the rebel host. Disdaining
to again take refuge under cover, the line stood manfully up, and met
the continued onsets of the foe. The brave Creighton stood on a hill
exposed to the fire--how could men falter while the noble form of their
leader was thus bared to the bullets of the enemy? They did not falter;
but the line stood like a wall. The rebels were soon seen to waver, and
as the night "cast its mantle over the combatants," they tardily and
solemnly withdrew, bearing with them the lacerated, bleeding victims to
their endurance.

At night the line was drawn in, and after making every effort for the
security of the command, the boys lay down upon their arms, harassed by
an oppressive uncertainty which always haunts the soldier in the
bivouac upon the battle-field.

During that long night the lonely picket-guard peered out into the
darkness, intent upon catching the first footfall of the cautious
foe. Slowly and with careful tread he paced his weary beat, fearful
that he might be pounced upon by the wily enemy ere he could give
the alarm to his slumbering companions. Through rain, and sleet, and
darkness--oppressed with the solemn stillness that at night hangs over
the earth--with a sense of loneliness weighing upon his feelings--he
stood like a spectre in the gloom, the guardian of the thousands
slumbering in the camp. While others dream of home, and friends, and
firesides, afar off on the hills of New England, or the starlit
prairies of the West, the wakeful picket keeps his vigil. May God
protect him in his watch!

As day again dispelled the shadows that darkened the hills and the
valleys, the columns of the brave Sigel were seen winding their way
through the village. A shout of welcome greeted these heroes. The
dreadful suspense that had weighed upon the hearts of the combatants of
the day before, during that long night of watching, now gave place to
cheerfulness; and confidence was again restored. But the cautions
Hampton had fled; and nothing met the eye save the frowning hills.

The following is the list of killed and wounded in this affair:

_Killed._--Corporal Austin Ball.

_Wounded._--Corporal E. M. Corrdett; privates, Sylvester Carter, Philip
Grigsby, Thomas Roff, Wm. P. Root, Wm. H. Kibbee, W. M. Perry, Stephen
Willock.

_Prisoners._--John Gordon, Andrew Atleff, Richard M. Vreeland, Douglass
F. Pomeroy, Henry T. Benton, Lewis T. Butts, Henry Alderman, Charles
Bradly, James Snider, John Beiler, W. M. Perry.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE REGIMENT ORDERED TO THE FRONT.--BATTLE OF CHANCELLORSVILLE.


Near the middle of April, 1863, the regiment marched down to Aquia
Landing, where it remained in camp for two weeks.

General Hooker was now in command of the grand Army of the Potomac,
having relieved Burnside after that general's unsuccessful attack on
Fredericksburg. Hooker resolved to make an attempt to drive the rebel
army from the vicinity of the Rappahannock. Burnside's failure had
demonstrated the impracticability of crossing the river at
Fredericksburg; for no army was safe for a moment with a strong army
behind three lines of well-constructed earthworks in its front, and a
wide and deep river in its rear. He therefore chose a flank movement by
the way of Banks and United States fords, thus striking the left flank
of the enemy near Chancellorsville Court-house, and avoiding their
strong fortifications in the rear of Fredericksburg.

The Seventh Regiment arrived in the vicinity of Chancellorsville on the
afternoon of the 30th of April, and encamped for the night a little
southeast of the latter place, and near the Fredericksburg plankroad.

Early on Friday morning it was ordered forward, and took position in
the second line of battle, in an open wood-lot, facing south. Late in
the afternoon it was ordered back; and it finally took position
directly south of the famous brick house, called the Chancellorsville
Place, where headquarters were established and maintained during most
of the action.

Just before dark the rebels came up in great numbers, in an attack on
Knapp's Battery, which was stationed on the left. The Seventh was
ordered to its support, but the attack was repelled before the regiment
became warmly engaged. It remained in support of this battery during
the night and in the forenoon of the following day. About noon of the
2d of May, the regiment was ordered forward to support a line of
skirmishers; but this line, refusing to advance, was passed by the
regiment, when it took the advance, and most handsomely drove the enemy
back for some distance, holding the ground for several hours, when it
was ordered to retire. It did so without confusion, taking a new
position in rear of a piece of woods, where it remained until ordered
into the intrenchments.

During this advance, the right wing was hotly engaged, and lost
heavily; the left wing suffering slightly. It remained during the night
in its old position near the brick house, in the second line of battle.

On the 3d, the regiment advanced to what is known as "the old
rifle-pit," which it occupied while the other troops were falling back
across a cleared field south of the Fredericksburg plankroad. Here it
was exposed to a galling fire from the advancing rebel column; but it
stood firm. When the balance of the troops of the brigade were in
proper position, it formed under the protection of a battery, and
slowly moved off the field, exposed to a terrible fire of both musketry
and artillery, taking up its position in rear of the brigade. The
brigade, however, was soon driven back, and passed to the rear of the
regiment, exposing it to a severe fire. Soon the order came for a
general advance, when the brigade, with a loud shout, dashed at the
foe, led by the Seventh. The rebels were pushed back for a considerable
distance; but no support coming up, the brigade was compelled to fall
back to the south of the brick house, where it halted, and laid down in
the road; but about eleven o'clock at night the shelling became so
continuous and heavy that it was forced still further back, and finally
resulting in its withdrawal to the vicinity of United States Ford. That
night the regiment occupied a rifle-pit about half a mile from the
river. At four o'clock in the afternoon of the 5th, it was relieved by
the Fifth Ohio; and taking a circuitous route, arrived in a ravine on
the left of the column, and near the river, and was soon after employed
in the intrenchments.

Early in the morning of the 6th, the regiment crossed the river on a
pontoon at United States Ford, and in the afternoon of the 7th arrived
at its old camp at Aquia Landing.

In this battle the regiment was actively engaged but a small portion of
the time. The loss was not severe, when taking into account the
magnitude of the engagement, and its duration.

Why the army recrossed the river has not been fully explained. The
immediate battle was not a defeat; at least it has not been considered
as such. However, the two columns of Sedgwick and Hooker failed to
unite, which fact may have had an influence in determining the retreat.
The attacks of the enemy had been repulsed at all points, while
Sedgwick had carried a portion of their fortifications in rear of
Fredericksburg. The retreat alone turned a prospective victory into a
humiliating defeat. The grand army failed to accomplish the purpose of
its advance, and was compelled to hasten its march across the river in
retreat, over which it had, but a week before, advanced in triumph. It
can be said by way of apology only, that while at Chancellorsville the
army maintained its reputation for bravery and endurance, the enemy
manifestly looked upon it as a fruitless victory to him.

The following is a list of the killed and wounded:

_Killed._--Orderly-Sergeant Henry Whiting; Color-Sergeant John D.
Creigh; Corporal A. C. Trimmer; privates, Charles H. Cheeney, E. N.
Larom, Henry A. Pratt, John Randle, Almon Lower, John Lee, Stafford
Penney, Thomas Carle, A. C. Steadman, Victor Perrley, Henry Ackman.

_Wounded._--Orderly-Sergeant Elmon Hingston; sergeants, H. H.
Bailey, John S. Davis, James Lapham, H. L. Allen; corporals, A. A.
Austin, John Gardiner, S. M. Cole, J. S. Kellogg; privates, W. Furniss,
H. Owen, F. Eldridge, W. Van Wye, E. C. Palmer, D. L. Hunt, E. V. Nash,
Henry H. Pierce, O. Jackman, C. A. Wood, H. S. Smalley, Charles P.
Smith, S. P. Sherley, F. Rockefellow, Frank Randal, Joseph Kubler,
Michael St. Auge, David Boil, James Dixon, Oliver Wise, James Farron,
G. Breakman, F. Mauley, John Shelby, Andrew Copeland, S. G. Cone, W. W.
Hunt, E. Kennedy, H. G. Benton, A. S. Raymond, C. A. Parks, Isaac
Stratton, H. Thwing, James Baxter, J. W. Benson, S. Hughes, P. Smith,
S. A. Fuller, F. Hank, John Clonde, E. O. Whiting, G. W. Bonn, S. H.
Barnum, J. C. Brooks, W. H. Fox, I. H. Gregg, W. Hunter, H. Jones, S.
Moneysmith, S. S. Pelton, B. Wilson, D. W. Waters, W. H. Bannister, H.
Lewis, W. J. Evans, C. L. Cowden, H. Hoffman, S. Renz, M. Saiser, E. A.
Spurn, L. Knoble.




CHAPTER XIX.

ACCOMPANIES THE GRAND ARMY INTO PENNSYLVANIA.--BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG.


After the battle of Chancellorsville, the regiment remained for some
time in its camp at Aquia Landing. The Army of the Potomac, as well as
that of Lee, was quietly reorganizing, preparatory to another struggle.
Soon Lee began to threaten the outer line of Hooker, by making
demonstrations on the various fords of the Rappahannock. At one time
threatening to move boldly across, and at another menacing the flank,
as if to attack one wing of the army. These various movements gave rise
to sharp skirmishes, nothing more. At last it was evident that Lee
meant an invasion of the North. The Army of the Potomac was therefore
set in motion.

The Seventh left its camp early in June, and proceeded to Martinsburg
by the way of Fairfax. Lee continuing his flank movement, the grand
army was compelled to fall back across the Potomac; the Seventh
crossing at Edward's Ferry. The rebel army now crossed the river by the
way of Williamsport, and moved forward towards Pennsylvania. The Army
of the Potomac moved in the same direction, passing through Frederick
City, Maryland, and taking up its position in rear of Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania. The line of battle was formed a little distance from and
facing the town. On the first day of July the rebel army advanced and
occupied the town, but the day was exhausted in manoeuvring, attended
with slight skirmishing between the advance of the two armies.

Hooker had been relieved, and General Meade ordered to assume command.

After the Seventh arrived on the field it took its position on the left
side of the Gettysburg and Littletown pike.

Early on the morning of the 2d it took a position on a hill on the
right of this road, at the same time sending Company H to the front,
under command of Captain McClelland. This company remained at the front
during the entire day. For the first time in its history, the regiment
occupied a position under cover, a stone wall being in its front. Up to
this time it had not been exposed to the fire of infantry; but during
the afternoon it suffered slight loss from a brisk artillery fire. At
eleven o'clock at night it advanced down the pike, and took a position
in a hollow, running at right angles with the road. It was now exposed
to a musketry fire, resulting in the wounding of one man. It soon fell
back to a stone wall, parallel with a road leading to the pike; and
shortly after it advanced to this road, from which twenty men were sent
forward as skirmishers, under command of Sergeant Stratton. This
gallant soldier was mortally wounded while bravely leading his command
against the foe.

On the morning of the 3d the regiment moved forward, after having
called in the skirmishers, to the relief of the Sixtieth New York
Volunteers, occupying a line of intrenchments. In the evening it was
relieved, and withdrew to the breastworks in the rear; but was soon
after ordered forward to the relief of another regiment, where it
remained until late in the evening. During the entire day it was
exposed to a heavy fire of musketry, from which it suffered
considerable loss, considering the position it occupied. When relieved,
it withdrew to the position held by it in the morning.

At one o'clock on the morning of the 4th of July, it again moved
forward to the intrenchments, where it remained till the brigade moved
off in the direction of Littletown.

The following incidents occurred July the 3d: While occupying the
intrenchments, a white flag was seen flying from the front of the
enemy's lines. The firing being suspended, seventy-eight rebels came
forward and surrendered, including six officers. Lieutenant Leigh, of
Ewell's staff, came forward and endeavored to stop the surrender; but
was fired upon by the regiment, and instantly killed.

Corporal John Pollock leaped over the breastworks and captured the flag
of the Fourteenth Virginia rebel regiment.

Private James J. Melton was wounded, and afterwards taken to a
hospital, where he remained for some time; since which his friends have
heard nothing from him. The wound being in the head, he is supposed to
have become deranged and wandered away, unable to give any account of
himself. No means have been left untried to obtain information of his
whereabouts, but without avail.

The regiment having fought under partial cover, the loss was slight:
one killed and seventeen wounded.




CHAPTER XX.

AFTER REACHING THE RAPIDAN IT GOES TO GOVERNOR'S ISLAND.--AFTER ITS
RETURN IT ACCOMPANIES HOOKER'S CORPS TO THE WESTERN DEPARTMENT.


After the battle of Gettysburg, the regiment was with the grand army in
pursuit of the broken columns of General Lee. Passing through Frederick
City, it arrived at Harper's Ferry and went into camp. Here it remained
for two days, when it moved across the Potomac, and again passing up
the beautiful Loudon Valley, crossed the Blue Ridge to Fairfax and
Manassas Junction, over the old battle-field of Bull Run. Again taking
up the line of march, it crossed the Rappahannock below Culpepper
Court-house, and encamped on the banks of the Rapidan.

About this time a riot broke out in New York city, which required the
presence of the military, as an assistance to the civil authorities.
The Government was therefore called upon to furnish troops. Several
regiments were at once dispatched to the scene of strife. Among these
was the Seventh. It left the vicinity of the Rapidan about one week
after its arrival there. It marched to Alexandria, and there taking the
United States ship Baltic, passed down the Potomac through Chesapeake
Bay to the ocean, arriving on Governor's Island in the latter part of
August. It remained until the first of September, when again embarking,
it sailed to Alexandria, from whence it marched to the Rapidan, near
its old camp.

General Rosecrans had now been removed from the command of the Army of
the Cumberland, and General Grant assumed control. The army occupied
the vicinity of Chattanooga, Tennessee; while the rebel army under
General Bragg occupied Mission Ridge, immediately in front of and
overlooking the city. The task of driving Bragg from this position was
assigned to General Grant.

Before entering upon this campaign, however, it was necessary to
re-enforce the Army of the Cumberland; for it had not entirely
recovered from the disastrous battle of Chickamauga. For this purpose
it was necessary to draw on the Army of the Potomac, now lying idle on
the banks of the Rapidan. At this time this army had, _positively_
speaking, accomplished nothing. It had barely saved Washington from the
enemy. To be sure, it had seen many hard-fought battles, and on all
occasions sustained its reputation for courage and endurance. But the
results following these battles were entirely negative; and after more
than two years of marches, counter-marches, sieges, and battles, when
graves had been dug from the Potomac to the James, and filled with the
best blood of the land, and the country left in mourning for her fallen
braves, but little territory had been gained, and the possession of
this little being constantly disputed by a well-organized and gallant
army. A sort of fatality had thus settled down upon the Army of the
Potomac. Some of the best generals had been summoned to its command,
but to no purpose. The hand of fate rested upon it heavily. When about
to seize upon victory, some stream would rise in its rear, or some
unseen accident happen to its communications or line of supplies,
compelling it to let go its hold on victory, and in its stead to accept
defeat. No wonder, then, that the authorities saw fit to send a part of
this not very promising army to a department where victory sometimes
rested upon the Federal arms. Hooker's corps was therefore ordered to
report to Grant.

The Seventh being a part of this command, left its camp on the Rapidan
in the latter part of September, and moving up to Washington, passed
over to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, when it left for Nashville,
Tennessee, by the way of Columbus, Indianapolis, and Louisville. It
soon after left for Wartrays, by the way of Murfreesboro'. It was now
ordered to construct winter-quarters, but having them nearly completed,
it was ordered to Bridgeport, Alabama, where it arrived in due time.

This entire trip from the East was accomplished without any delay, and
nothing occurring to lessen the good opinion the people entertained for
this veteran corps.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE SEVENTH JOINS GRANT'S ARMY.--THE BATTLES OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN,
MISSION RIDGE, AND RINGGOLD.


After remaining for some time at Bridgeport, the regiment was ordered
to the vicinity of Lookout Mountain. It marched to the little village
of Wahatcha, at the base of this mountain, and went into camp. It
remained, however, but a short time, and then returned to Bridgeport,
where it went into permanent camp.

Late in the fall, General Grant had perfected his arrangements to
attack the rebel stronghold on Lookout Mountain; and, as a preparatory
measure, his vast army was concentrated in the vicinity of Chattanooga.
An immense quantity of stores had been gathered, while garrisons were
placed at points to be held for the purpose of keeping up communication
with the army after its advance. Early in November, the Seventh left
its quarters in Alabama, and joined the grand army.

On the 24th of November, the army was set in motion. The Seventh passed
up the northern slope of the mountain, and crossing Lookout Creek,
formed in line of battle. It now steadily advanced, arriving at the
rebel camp to find it in the hands of our men. But desultory firing was
kept up by the rebel sharpshooters concealed in the timber and behind
rocks on the summit of the mountain. The regiment was now ordered on
picket. Passing around to the east side of the mountain, it was fired
upon by the enemy; but owing to their being entirely hidden from view
by the dense fog that had settled over the combatants, it did not
return the fire, but secured a safe harbor behind rocks and trees. This
fire was kept up for nearly two hours, with a loss to the regiment of
only four men wounded. Before night the regiment was relieved from duty
and marched to the rear, bivouacking in a peach orchard.

About ten A.M. of the 25th, it moved down the opposite side of the
mountain, and passing through a small valley, soon reached Mission
Ridge. Without halting, the command moved steadily up this mountain,
and on arriving on its summit, found that the rebels had fled. Passing
into another valley, it bivouacked for the night. On the 26th, the
command moved to the vicinity of Pigeon Mountain, where it remained
till the following day. Early on the morning of the 27th, it moved on
to Ringgold, Georgia, where it found the enemy securely posted on
Taylor's Ridge. On arriving in this town, the brigade was ordered to
scale the mountain. It was formed on the railroad, in two lines of
battle; the second line being ordered to preserve a distance of one
hundred yards. Two Pennsylvania regiments formed the first line, and
the Sixty-sixth and Seventh Ohio the second line; the Seventh being on
the left. The enemy soon discovered the intention of our troops, and
made his dispositions to meet the attack by extending his right. As
soon as the advance began, the enemy opened fire. Arriving at the foot
of the hill, the first line halted to return the fire, and the second
line passed through. The Seventh now moved into a ravine, where it was
exposed to a terrible fire from the front and both flanks, but it
pressed on without firing a shot. Arriving almost on the crest of the
hill, the fire became too effective for even these gallant veterans to
withstand, and the line gave way, fighting as it went. In this manner,
the surviving few reached the foot of the hill.

This engagement was short, but terrible in its results to the regiment.
It may be said that with this struggle its star of glory began to
fade--its pride and spirit were broken. But one officer escaped
uninjured, while many were killed. The number of men in the action was
two hundred and six, of whom fourteen was killed and forty-nine
wounded.

For what purpose this handful of men were ordered to storm the enemy's
position on the hill has never been explained. There was no artillery
used to cover the assault, without which it was impossible to carry the
position with such a force, and hazardous to attempt it with any.
Within a short distance there was a large amount of artillery, which
could have been placed in position, after which Taylor's Ridge would
have been untenable by the enemy. On seeing such dispositions being
made, he would probably have anticipated the movement, and fled without
firing a gun. But thus far Hooker and his almost invincible corps had
carried every thing before them. This success seemed to bring with it a
contempt for the rebel soldiers, which finally resulted in the great
disaster at Taylor's Ridge. A good general will resist the influences
growing out of success, and not be led by these to undertake
impossibilities, and by such rashness endanger that which he has
already gained. It requires greater self-control to resist the
temptations following victory, than to overcome the demoralizing
influences of defeat. Victory must never elate a general, while defeat
must never depress him.

After this battle, an unsuccessful attempt was made to get the regiment
ordered home. But the response of Halleck, to a similar application,
made after the battle of Cedar Mountain, was reiterated. "No!" said the
old warrior; "not so long as there is a lame drummer-boy left; not if
you will send us a whole new regiment in place of this handful. We know
these men--they are just such as we want." This compliment, from an
officer who was in command of all of the armies of the United States,
was worth many a hard march, as well as battle.

The following is a list of the killed and wounded in the three battles
of Lookout Mountain, Mission Ridge, and Taylor's Ridge:

_Killed._--Colonel W. R. Creighton; Lieutenant-Colonel O. J. Crane;
Adjutant Moris Baxter; second-lieutenants, Isaac C. Jones and Joseph
Cryne; sergeants, J. C. Corlet, William Van Wye; corporals, Alfred
Austin, W. H. Bennett; privates, C. F. King, C. E. Wall, D. P. Wood, J.
L. Fish, Thomas Sweet, Oliver Grinels, Lawrence Remmel, H. Hanson, J.
H. Merrill, William Pfuel.

_Wounded._--Captains, W. D. Braden, Samuel McClelland; first-lieutenants,
George A. McKay, George D. Lockwood; second-lieutenants, D. H. Brown,
E. H. Bohm, H. N. Spencer, Christian Nesper; sergeants, M. M. Cutler,
John Gardner, L. Wilson, Isaac Stratton, Elmore Hemkston; corporals,
James W. Raymond, E. V. Nash, John Baptee, C. Glendenning, Hiram Deeds,
Thomas Dowse, George Spencer, William Senfert, J. E. Hine, W. H.
Petton, J. H. Cleverton, H. C. Hunt, M. H. Sheldon, John Phillips, W.
O. Barnes, M. Fitzgerald, J. Tuttle, George Eikler, W. J. Lowrie, H. O.
Pixley, W. H. Johnson, John Bergin, W. Wise, H. B. Pownell, J. N. Hall,
V. Reynolds, R. White, H. Wright, R. D. Gates, Otis Martin, Joseph
Kincaid, W. O. Johnson, J. Decker, J. Hall, C. Cowden, D. F. Dow,
George Mandall, H. Fezer, George Raynette, L. Habbig, John Schwinck,
Joseph Rowe, C. Deitz.

The following were wounded at Lookout Mountain:

John H. Galvin, M. C. Stone, M. W. Bartlett, James A. Garrison, Louis
Owen, A. Gordon.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE ADVANCE TOWARDS ATLANTA.--SKIRMISHING.--HOMEWARD MARCH.--ITS
RECEPTION.--MUSTER OUT.


The series of successes in the vicinity of Chattanooga made Grant a
lieutenant-general, and gave Sherman the command of the armies in
Tennessee. Preparations were now made to press back the forces
marshalled in rebellion at all points. Early in the spring the ball was
opened in the East by Lieutenant-General Grant in person, while in the
West the indomitable Sherman set his invincible army in motion towards
the very heart of the so-called Confederacy. The advance was sounded,
and the Union hosts pressed onward.

By sunset on the 17th of May the Seventh Regiment reached Calhoun, and
on the 19th the vicinity of Cassville, where it hastily threw up some
breastworks; but after two hours was ordered forward in line of battle.
On the 23d it passed through the latter village, across the railroad,
and at four P.M., arrived on the banks of the Etawa River; and after
fording the stream, bivouacked for the night. On the 25th it took
the advance of the entire column, and deployed seven companies as
skirmishers. The march of these companies was very toilsome, and their
progress correspondingly slow. Near Pumpkin Vine Creek the advance was
fired upon by the enemy's pickets, and a sharp skirmish ensued. During
this time the enemy attempted to destroy the bridge over the creek, but
were driven back by the regiment; when it immediately crossed, and took
possession of a commanding hill.

Generals Hooker and Geary, with staff and body-guard, had moved forward
with the skirmish-line, and sometimes in advance even of this. On one
of the latter occasions the body-guard was fired upon, and the three
reserve companies of the Seventh were ordered to their relief.

The advance of the enemy was now held in check until the other
regiments of the brigade came up, when he was dispersed.

In this skirmish, one man was killed and eight wounded. At this point
the command threw up some breastworks, where it remained until six
P.M., when it advanced in line of battle. In this movement the regiment
became hotly engaged, losing three killed and fifteen wounded. One of
the enemy's shell exploding in the ranks, occasioned the loss of eight
men. On the 28th and the previous night, considerable skirmishing was
kept up in front of the line of intrenchments, as well as some sharp
artillery firing; which, however, did very little damage. These pieces
were soon silenced by a New York battery. All day and night of the 30th
the regiment was engaged in sharp skirmishing; but one man, however,
was injured, and he severely. On the 2d of June it moved forward to
Allatoona, Georgia, where it built breastworks, and went into camp.

Here it remained for some time, when its term of service having
expired, it hastened its steps homeward; thus severing the connecting
link between it and the army. The members of this veteran regiment now
felt that they were no longer soldiers: that, although they retained
the organization and uniform of a regiment, they were private citizens
hastening to enjoy home and friends, from which they had been so long
separated. They marched with joyous hearts, and yet there was sadness
present with this happiness. Many a comrade was left behind, never to
return. Fresh graves marked its line of march from Chattanooga to
Georgia. Friends and kindred were sleeping beneath these green mounds,
and they could not pass them by, in this homeward march, without a tear
of regret.

Following the line of the railroad, the regiment finally halted and
awaited transportation. When this was furnished, it went to Nashville
by railroad, at which place it embarked on steamers and started down
the Cumberland River. Arriving in the vicinity of Harpeth Shoals, it
was fired on by guerrillas, and two men wounded. Both officers and men
were desirous of landing and punishing this band of outlaws for their
insolence, but could not prevail on the captain of the boat to permit
it.

Arriving in the Ohio River, Sergeant Trembly fell from the boat and was
drowned. This was a sad occurrence. He had served faithfully during the
service of the regiment; and now, on the eve of being mustered out, he
lost his life by accident. The boat was stopped, and efforts made to
rescue him, but without success.

When the regiment reached Cincinnati, the Fifth Ohio had already
arrived. The city being about to give an ovation to this gallant
regiment, the Seventh was invited to take part in it, by partaking of
the hospitality of the city. This demonstration, in honor of the two
regiments, was eminently fitting, for they were united by the ties of
long fellowship. From the very first they had been brigaded together.
The history of the one was the history of the other. They had marched,
bivouacked, and fought side by side. Each prized the honor and renown
of the other not less than its own. The city of Cincinnati, in thus
extending its hospitality to the Seventh Regiment, did much credit to
itself. The friends of the regiment will remember this magnanimous
conduct, while the members of the regiment will keep green the memory
of the gallant Fifth.

The following is from the Cleveland Herald, of the 11th of June:

"On Saturday afternoon, soon after the evening papers had been issued,
a dispatch was received, announcing that the Seventh Ohio had but just
left Cincinnati, and would not arrive in Cleveland until about seven
o'clock Sunday morning. Bulletins to this effect were at once printed,
and distributed through the city; but a large crowd of persons, not
aware of this fact, came down to watch the arrival of the evening
train, on which the Seventh was supposed to be coming.

"On Sunday morning the population of the city were early astir, and by
seven o'clock a large and continually increasing crowd had assembled in
and around the depot. The police, in full uniform, marched down to the
depot, and were followed by the old members of the Seventh, bearing the
second regimental flag, the first having been deposited in the
State-house at Columbus.

"At seven o'clock the ringing of the fire-bells announced the approach
of the time for the arrival of the train; and about half-past seven
o'clock a salute from the guns, manned by the Brooklyn Artillery, and
run down to the bluff at the foot of Water-street, announced the
arrival of the train.

"As it moved into the depot it was received with cheers by the
assembled crowd; and the war-worn veterans were soon out of the cars,
and surrounded by anxious and joyful friends. Shouts of welcome, hearty
hand-shaking, embraces and kisses, were showered upon the sun-browned
soldiers. Many of the scenes were very affecting. In one place a young
wife, whose husband had left for the field just after their marriage,
hung with clinging embrace on her returned brave, and her moist eyes
sought his with unutterable affection, her hands trembling with excess
of joy. In another, an old man, with both hands grasped in those of his
son, mingled smiles of joy over his returned boy, with tears of sorrow
for the one who had laid down his life for his country. Mothers clung
to sons, sisters to brothers, wives to husbands, and some little
children climbed up for a father's embrace.

"The number all told, men and officers, of those who returned, was two
hundred and forty-five. These were the remnants of nearly eleven
hundred men, who left Camp Dennison three years ago, on the
reorganization of the regiment. The whole number of the regiment is
five hundred and one, of whom the remainder were recruited at various
times, and their term of service not expired. Sixty of these were left
in Sherman's army; the rest are scattered in every direction, from the
James River to Atlanta. The greater part of those whose term of service
has not expired are to be consolidated with the same class in the Fifth
Ohio, which fought by its side in many a bloody fray, and which is to
retain its number. The slightly wounded were brought up with the
regiment, the more seriously wounded being left in different hospitals.

"The following is the present organization of the Seventh:

"Lieutenant-colonel, Sam. McClelland; surgeon, Dr. Bellows; assistant
surgeon, Dr. Ferguson; Captain Wilcox, Company E; Captain Kreiger,
Company K; Captain Clark, Company B; Captain Howe, Company A; Captain
Braden, Company G; Captain Davis, Company C, taken prisoner in last
fight; Captain Nesper, Company H; Captain McKay, Company F; Captain
Lockwood, Company D; Lieutenant Bohm, commanding Company I;
quartermaster, S. D. Loomis.

"The regiment left Chattanooga with the Fifth Ohio; but parted company
on the way, the Fifth having left their arms behind them, and were
therefore compelled to come by railroad, no unarmed troops being
allowed to come by the river. The Seventh came up the Cumberland and
Ohio rivers by steamboats, and were fired on by guerrillas on the way.
One man was lost, Sergeant Trembly, of Company C, about thirty miles
below Cincinnati. He was on the guards of the steamer cleaning his gun,
when he fell overboard. The boat was stopped, and efforts made to save
him; but he was carried away by the current and drowned.

"On reaching Cincinnati, they were ordered to Columbus to be mustered
out; but when the train got to Columbus, they were ordered to go on to
this city to be paid, and mustered out.

"After leaving the cars, and the greetings of friends were ended, the
men were marched to one part of the depot, and given a chance to wash
themselves. They were then conducted to tables set along the north wing
of the depot, where a hot breakfast had been provided by Wheeler and
Russel, on the order of the military committee. Rev. Mr. Goodrich
invoked the blessing.

"A number of ladies were on hand, who supplied the soldiers bountifully
with strawberries, after the more substantial part of the feast was
concluded.

"As soon as the men had been properly fed and refreshed, they fell into
line, and proceeded through Water and Superior streets to the front of
the government buildings, where the formal reception was to take place.
The procession was headed by the police, followed by a brass band, and
by the military committee, members of the council, and city officers.
The old members of the Seventh, with the second flag of the regiment,
tattered and torn, immediately preceded the bronzed veterans, who,
fully armed, and bearing their last flag, rent with a hailstorm of
hostile bullets, marched with proud steps through the streets they had
left three years and three months since. Carriages followed with the
sick and wounded who were unable to march. The procession was
accompanied with a throng of people, and crowds lined the streets,
whilst flags fluttered in all directions.

"On reaching the front of the government building, the regiment was
drawn up in double line, and Prosecuting-Attorney Grannis, in the
absence of Mayor Senter, addressed the regiment, in behalf of the
corporation and citizens, as follows:

"SOLDIERS OF THE SEVENTH OHIO--The people of the city of Cleveland
welcome you home. More than three years ago, you went forth with full
ranks--more than a thousand strong. To-day a little remnant returns to
receive the greetings of friends, and to mingle again with society, as
was your wont in times gone by. But this is not all. You, and those who
went with you, whether present here to-day or absent, whether among the
living or the dead, shall be held forever in grateful remembrance.

"We witnessed your departure with pride, not unmingled with sorrow. We
did not regret that the men of the glorious Seventh had gone out to
fight against a brutal and insolent foe, or fear that any member of it
would ever fail to do his whole duty in the perilous ridges of the
battle; but we did know that your departure was attended with many
sacrifices;--that you would be exposed to cold, fatigue, and hunger;
would suffer from disease, from honorable wounds, and in loathsome
prisons; and that many a noble form would bite the dust. We knew that
these things must needs be, that the nation might live. The half was
not told us. It did not enter into our hearts to believe what you would
suffer and what you would accomplish. Upon almost every battle-field,
from Cross Lanes to Dalton, the glorious banner of the Seventh has been
in the van of the battle. We have watched your course with painful
interest. After every battle, came the intelligence that your regiment
had fought bravely, and had come out with thinned ranks.

"You have the grand consolation of knowing that the victories of
Gettysburg, of Lookout Mountain, of Ringgold, and of Resaca, were not
won without your aid. To have been in any one of those desperate
conflicts, is glory enough for any man. The record you have made will
seem almost like a tale of fiction. We have often had tidings of you,
but such as would not cause our cheeks to tingle with shame. It was
never said of the Seventh Ohio that it faltered in battle, that it
failed to do its whole duty. You have been faithful, uncomplaining, and
heroic. These things have not been accomplished without painful
sacrifices. How painful, let the honorable scars many will carry to
their graves answer. How painful, let this begrimed and tattered flag
answer. How painful, these thinned ranks will answer. Your gallant
colonel and lieutenant-colonel came home before you. Not as we could
have wished them to come, but wearing the habiliments which all must
wear; and now they lie yonder, and their graves are still wet with the
tears of their mourning countrymen.

"Not so fortunate many of your countrymen, for they lie in unknown
seclusion, but not in unhonored graves. We will not mourn these dead as
those who die without hope, for their names shall be honored, so long
as liberty is prized among men.

    "'Death makes no conquest of these conquerors,
    For now they live in fame, though not in life.'

"It is an honor to be engaged in this conflict, which those who share
it should fully prize; and those who have been engaged in it have shown
a self-sacrificing devotion to duty, seldom excelled. It is a conflict
in favor of liberty against treason and traitors; against a desperate
and implacable foe, fighting with desperate energy, that fraud,
oppression, and crime may stalk abroad in daylight.

"Let us hope that the final overthrow of rebellion is at hand; that
soon our soldiers may all return home, with--

          "'Brows bound with victorious wreaths,
    Their bruised arms hung up for monuments,
    Their stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
    Their dreadful marches to delightful measures.'

"On concluding, Mr. Grannis introduced Governor Brough, who also
addressed the regiment. He said in substance as follows:

"MEN OF THE SEVENTH OHIO--I know you are anxious to turn from this
public to private greetings, to clasp friends and acquaintances in your
hands and hearts. Under these circumstances I have not the courage to
detain you. I will not read the glorious record of your achievements,
for it would keep you so long. It is not necessary. We know your record
in all its glory, but not, like you, in all its pain. A little over
three years ago, on a Sabbath morning, you left Cleveland. Now, on a
Sabbath morning, you return to us. That Sabbath was hallowed, by the
purpose with which you went forth. This Sabbath is rendered sacred, by
the joy with which you are welcomed back to us.

"On behalf of the State, I am here to give you a cordial greeting on
your return. For the people of Cleveland, no formal greeting is
necessary. In the crowd that gather around you, you can read the
cordial welcome, that needs no words to express it.

"The Spartan mother, who sent her son to battle, bade him to return
with his shield in honor, or on his shield in death. You have returned
with your shields, and with honor reflected from them on you. But let
us not forget that many have come home on their shields. We cannot
forget those that, on another Sabbath morning, came home, and were
received by the city in the weeds of mourning.

"We welcome you back, not only because you are back, but because you
have reflected honor on your State. Standing, as I do, in the position
of father of all of the regiments of the State, it will not do for me
to discriminate; but I will say, that no regiment has returned to the
bosom of the State, and none remains to come after it, that will bring
back a more glorious record than the gallant old Seventh.

"There is no need to tell you what the lesson of this war is. You have
learned it in many a weary march, and on many a field of carnage. None
know better than you, that there are but two ways possible for the
termination of this war. One is an inglorious peace and disgraceful
submission, and the other is to completely crush the military power of
the rebellion. There is no other way; and he who goes about on
street-corners, and talks about a peace short of one or the other of
these alternatives, is either grossly ignorant or intentionally
attempting to deceive. More than that, no one knows better than
yourselves, that to secure a lasting peace, when the military power of
the rebellion is crushed, the cause of this infernal rebellion itself
must be thoroughly wiped out. You have been taught that in many a fiery
lesson, and know it to be a truth.

"There are gallant men and brave generals in the army laboring to reach
this end; and we have confidence that their efforts will be crowned
with success. God grant that it may be so. I had almost said that God
and Grant will make it so.

"But I will detain you no longer. There is another greeting awaiting
you in your homes--a greeting that no other eyes should witness. To
that sacred and precious greeting I remit you."

The regiment now marched off to Camp Cleveland, escorted by the old
members of the Seventh.

The men were given a brief furlough, after which preparations were made
to be mustered out.

On the 4th of July, a grand ovation was given to the regiment, in
connection with the Eighth Ohio; in fact, while the regiment remained
in Cleveland, it was one continued ovation. The citizens vied with each
other, in caring for and honoring the old Seventh. It seemed as if they
could not do enough. These brave men will not soon forget the anxious
care bestowed upon them by the citizens of Cleveland, during this
closing period of their career in the service of their country.

After remaining for a brief period in camp, the regiment was mustered
out; and after kindly farewells had been exchanged, each member
departed for his home, from which he had been so long absent in
protecting a Government that he loved from the ruthless touch of
treason and slavery.

When the regiment entered the field, it numbered more than a thousand
men. As these began to dwindle away by the shock of battle and the
ravages of disease, new members came in, until we find nearly fourteen
hundred men on the rolls, exclusive of three months' men: the latter
would swell the number to about eighteen hundred men. Of the former,
over six hundred were killed and wounded--the killed alone amounting to
about one hundred and thirty. One hundred and upwards died from
disease; while more than six hundred were discharged on account of
disability arising from various causes. Many of those who were on the
rolls at the time the regiment was mustered out were disabled for life,
and were only retained for the want of an opportunity to be discharged.
The whole number of able-bodied officers and men returning with the
regiment was only two hundred and forty-five, leaving upwards of eleven
hundred dead and disabled.




BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.


BRIGADIER-GENERAL E. B. TYLER.[3]

E. B. Tyler entered the service as colonel of the Seventh. He brought
with him some little military experience, having been a
brigadier-general of militia before the rebellion broke out.

          [3] General Tyler has failed to furnish us any data from
          which to write an extended sketch, though often requested to
          do so.

When General McClellan was about to make his advance into Western
Virginia, he selected Tyler to lead the way, on account of his thorough
acquaintance with that wild region, he having been engaged in
purchasing furs from the people for many years. During the entire
summer he was kept well out to the front. He was finally given a
brigade, with which to assist General Cox in driving General Wise from
the valley. He moved as far as Somerville, in the very heart of the
enemy's country, and was soon after in the skirmish of Cross Lanes.
From this time, during the remainder of his stay in the department, he
was in command at Charleston, in the Kanawha Valley. In the winter
following, he was ordered to Kelley's department, where he was again
given a brigade, with which he did good service on the outposts. We
next find him at the battle of Winchester, where he commanded a
brigade. It was his command that charged the battery, for which it
acquired so much renown. His conduct at this battle won him a star. He
now served with his command in the Valley, accompanying it to the
Rappahannock and back. After which he commanded the forces in the
battle of Port Republic. His conduct in this engagement is above
criticism. No general could have made better dispositions than he, and
no one would have met with better success. Defeat was certain; and all
that the best generalship could do, was to save barely a remnant of the
command. It is a wonder that any artillery was saved. He gained much
reputation in his command for the manner in which he acquitted himself
in this battle. He soon after left his old brigade, and finally took
command of a Pennsylvania brigade, which he led in the battle of
Fredericksburg, in December, 1862. He had acquired a fine reputation
with Governor Curtin, and his conduct in this battle confirmed it. The
spring following he was assigned to a command in Baltimore, under
General Schenck. At the time of the raid on Washington, in the summer
of 1864, he was at the front. During an engagement he became separated
from his command, and only escaped by dint of hard riding. After
remaining concealed for some days, he escaped, and returned in safety
to our lines. After this campaign he returned to Baltimore, where he is
at the present time stationed.


BREVET BRIG.-GEN. J. S. CASEMENT.

J. S. Casement came into the regiment as major, and was just the man
for the place. The regiment needed a practical, common-sense sort of a
man, and it found him in the person of Jack Casement. Many of his
previous years had been spent in the construction of railroads. In this
he had not a superior in the United States. He is of small stature, but
of iron frame; and for endurance has few equals. He will shoulder and
walk off under a load that would make the most athletic tremble. He has
probably superintended the laying of as much track as any man of his
age.

On joining the regiment, the major at once made himself useful in
looking after matters for the comfort of the command, that really
belonged to no one to look to, and yet, when attended to, went far to
improve the condition of the men. He rapidly acquired a knowledge of
military tactics, which was afterwards to fit him for a leader. This
was not difficult for him to do, for he made it a practical study. He
was always on duty when the occasion required it. This habit of
promptness he acquired while working large parties of men, and it never
left him during his service. During the long marches in Western
Virginia, he was ever watchful as to how matters were going on in the
rear; and while other mounted officers were riding leisurely along, he
was ever watchful of the train, as well as all other matters connected
with the easy movement of the command. Arriving in camp, he made it his
business to see that all was snug. At the affair at Cross Lanes he
conducted himself with such gallantry as to endear him to the entire
regiment. He rode over that fatal field as calm and collected as on
drill. When his superior officers had escaped, he organized the balance
of the command, and then commenced that memorable march over the hills
and mountains, through the valleys and over the streams, of that wild
waste. It was finally crowned with success, and the regiment felt proud
of its major; and the Western Reserve felt proud, too, that they had
sent so brave a man to serve with so brave a regiment. He now did his
duty, until we find the regiment in the East, and in its expedition to
Blue's Gap, Major Casement at its head. Just before reaching the
fortifications, he made a speech. Said he: "Boys, you've not got much
of a daddy, but with such as you have, I want you to go for those
rebels." And they did go for them in earnest. It seems the boys did not
object to the character of the "daddy." He now went with the regiment
to Winchester, where he was engaged in that battle. He sat on his horse
where the bullets were flying thickest, and seemed to be a stranger to
fear. When the battle was nearly over, followed by a few men, he took
possession of a piece of artillery, and held it until the close of the
action. In the evening succeeding the battle, he found that ten
rifle-bullets had passed through the cape of his coat on the left side,
near to his arm.

Major Casement accompanied the regiment on its march up the Valley,
making himself useful in the way of constructing bridges and roads. On
arriving at Falmouth, on the Rappahannock, he tendered his resignation,
which being accepted, he returned to his home. All missed the merry
laugh, as well as the merry jokes, of the ever happy major.

He was not long permitted to enjoy home, however, as in the following
summer he was made colonel of the One Hundred and Third Ohio Regiment,
and immediately after left for the field. His regiment was ordered to
Kentucky, in which department he served until Sherman's triumphant
march on Atlanta, when he joined him, and soon after commanded a
brigade. In this campaign he distinguished himself. After Sherman left
for Savannah, Casement commanded a brigade in Thomas' army. At the
battle of Franklin, which followed, he conducted himself in such a
brilliant manner as to win a star by brevet. He now took part in the
pursuit of the disorganized forces of Hood, and when it ceased, went to
Wilmington, North Carolina, with the corps of General Schofield, where
he has since remained.

The career of this dashing officer has been one of usefulness, and his
numerous friends, as well as the entire country, appreciate his
services.


BRIGADIER JOHN W. SPRAGUE.[4]

General Sprague entered the service as captain of Company E. He
immediately gained a high character as an officer, both for his fine
military bearing and gentlemanly deportment. His company was first in
discipline, and during the time he was in command not one of his men
was under arrest. His influence was such, that they seldom disobeyed an
order. They regarded their captain as a fit person to lead them--one
whose example was worthy of imitation.

          [4] The writer has been unable to learn sufficient of General
          Sprague's services, after leaving the Seventh, to enable him
          to write an extended sketch, which he very much regrets, for
          his gallant services entitle him to a more lengthy notice.

During the trying marches in Western Virginia, Captain Sprague was ever
at his post to encourage and cheer his men. A few days previous to the
Cross Lanes affair, he was given a leave of absence; and soon after
leaving for his home, he was taken prisoner by the enemy's cavalry. He
remained in prison about a year, suffering all the hardships that the
imagination can picture. When he was released, his hair had become
gray, and his every appearance was indicative of great suffering. On
his return, he was immediately commissioned colonel of the Sixty-third
Ohio Regiment, and very soon after entered the field. From this time on
he did gallant service in the armies of the West. His great military
talent was at last acknowledged, and his vast services rewarded by
conferring on him a star. He is now serving in the West.


LIEUT.-COL. SAMUEL McCLELLAND.

The subject of this sketch is a native of Ireland. He was born in 1829.
While in his youth, his parents emigrated to this country, landing at
Philadelphia, from whence they went to Pittsburgh. Remaining here for a
short time, they removed to Youngstown, Ohio, where they have since
resided.

He entered the service as first-lieutenant of Company I, and was at
once active in the discharge of his duty. He accompanied the regiment
to Western Virginia, where he took part in all the hard marches that
followed. At the affair of Cross Lanes, he demonstrated, by his
gallantry, the fact of the possession of great military talent; for he
was brave, prudent, and skilful. Up to the battle of Winchester, he was
with the regiment in every march and skirmish. At this battle he
commanded a company, and had the honor of opening the battle, and
sustaining it for a few minutes, till other companies formed on his
flanks.

He was engaged in the following battles and skirmishes, which embrace
every one in which the regiment was engaged: Cross Lanes, Winchester,
Port Republic, Cedar Mountain, Antietam, Dumfries, Chancellorsville,
Gettysburg, Lookout Mountain, Mission Ridge, and Taylor's Ridge. The
various skirmishes and battles during the march of Sherman to Marietta,
are to be added to this list. At the battle of Winchester he was
slightly wounded in the head, but remained on the field, against the
urgent solicitations of his friends, until the close of the engagement.
At the battle of Taylor's Ridge he was severely wounded in the leg. He
now returned to his home, but remained but a short time, rejoining his
command before he was entirely recovered.

While in the East he was made captain of Company H, and after the
battle of Taylor's Ridge, lieutenant-colonel. He now took command of
the regiment; leading it through the arduous campaign of Sherman, as
far as Marietta, in which service he won a fine reputation for ability
as an officer. He was known and recognized throughout the army as the
fighting colonel. At the above place, the old Seventh turned its steps
homeward, commanded by Colonel McClelland, who had the proud
satisfaction of leading the regiment into Cleveland, to do which the
lamented Creighton was ever ambitious.

When encamped in the city, he set himself industriously at work
preparing the regiment to be mustered out; which was done in due time.

McClelland was one of the few officers who were ever at their post. He
was brave, active, and zealous, a good officer in every particular. His
kindness and good feeling towards his fellow-soldiers won him many
friends. His family have suffered severe loss, two brave brothers
having died in battle. During all this affliction he has remained true
to his country, his patriotism never growing cold for a moment.


MAJOR FREDERICK A. SEYMOUR.

The subject of this sketch came into the regiment as captain of Company
G, having organized the company immediately after the first call for
troops. He had seen a good deal of service in the militia of his native
State, which was of great assistance to him in this new position. When
the regiment was organized for the three-years' service, he was elected
to his old position, which was an indication of the esteem his company
had for him.

During the terrible campaign among the mountains of Western Virginia,
his health became very much impaired; till just previous to the affair
at Cross Lanes, he was compelled to leave his command and seek to
restore it in his home. Therefore he was not in that skirmish. He soon
after returned, but after reaching the Shenandoah Valley his health
again failed him, and he once more sought to restore it by returning to
his home. While he was absent the battle of Winchester was fought, and
he therefore did not take part in the engagement.

He now accompanied the regiment in its march up the Shenandoah River,
across the Blue Ridge, and back again to Front Royal; and from thence
to Port Republic. In the battle fought at the latter place he was
conspicuous for bravery. During that well-contested action be
contributed all that lay in his power towards winning a victory. But
valor alone cannot win a battle; numbers combined with it can only
accomplish that. This was his first experience under fire; but he stood
up to the work like a veteran; being second to none in deeds of daring.

Soon after this action he was engaged in the battle of Cedar Mountain,
where he more than sustained the reputation acquired at Port Republic.
This was a terrible battle, and every officer and private who fought
there became a hero.

From this time forward the writer has no knowledge of his services,
beyond the fact that he was promoted to major; which position he filled
till some time in the fall of 1863, when he resigned, and returned to
his home. It can be truly said that, wherever Major Seymour was placed,
he endeavored to do his duty. Among his fellow-soldiers he had many
friends, and he will always be remembered as a kind-hearted gentleman.


SURGEON FRANCIS SALTER.

Francis Salter entered the service as assistant surgeon of the Seventh
Regiment; and on the resignation of Surgeon Cushing, was appointed
surgeon. He held this position until the latter part of 1862, when he
was made a medical director, and assigned to the staff of General
Crooks. As a surgeon, he hardly had a superior in the service. His
services were of great value in the hospitals, as he had had a long
experience in those of England, his native country. He has remained in
the service from the beginning of the war; and during that long period
has alleviated the suffering of many a soldier.


C. J. BELLOWS.

The subject of this sketch was appointed surgeon of the regiment, from
the position of assistant in the Fifth Ohio. Before entering the
service he was enjoying a good practice in Northern Ohio, in which he
had acquired a good reputation. While with the regiment he was much
esteemed, by reason of his ability as a surgeon, as well as for his
kind and courteous behavior.


G. E. DENIG.

On the appointment of Francis Salter to the post of surgeon, the
subject of this sketch was made assistant. While with the regiment he
was attentive to his duties, and always kind and obliging to those
seeking medical aid. He many times acted as surgeon of the regiment;
and on such occasions was always prompt in the discharge of his duty.


FREDERICK T. BROWN, D.D.

The subject of this sketch was born in Coshocton County, Ohio, of
respectable and pious parents. His father was a wealthy merchant, and
therefore gave his son a liberal education. After arriving at a proper
age, he was sent to Princeton College, New Jersey, where he graduated.
He early developed those Christian qualities which he has possessed in
such an eminent degree during the whole course of his life. He was born
to be a minister. At an early age his mind took a lasting hold upon
religious truths; and it has never relaxed its energies in that
direction for a single moment. He has gone on doing good from a child,
his usefulness only increasing as his mind developed its powers. He has
been a close student of theology during his whole life; and it is doing
no discredit to others to say, that in this respect he has hardly a
peer in the United States. He graduated at the Theological Seminaries
at Princeton, New Jersey, and Geneva, Switzerland.

The Westminster Church, of Cleveland, Ohio, was organized by him; and
in the course of his nine years' labor with it, increased from a small
congregation to one of the most respectable religious societies of the
city. He was pastor of this church at the breaking out of the
rebellion.

While the Seventh Regiment was at Camp Dennison, he paid it a visit by
request of some of the officers, and was immediately chosen its
chaplain, there being but few dissenting voices. Immediately returning
to his home, he tendered his resignation to his church, which, however,
was not accepted; but in its stead, he was voted a leave of absence,
which he accepted, but refusing to draw pay during the time. He joined
the regiment early in July, while it was in Western Virginia, and at
once entered upon his duties.

While here, he preached a sermon in one of the churches--to the rebel
as well as Union people of the town--which was noted for the powerful
arguments used against the position occupied by the South in relation
to the Federal Government. This effort made him many friends in the
village. He afterwards had a large influence over its people, being
often invited to their homes. On such occasions he was received with a
hearty welcome; although he never neglected an opportunity to reprove
them for the opinions cherished by them.

While at Glenville, Gilmer County, he carried a message to General Cox,
whose forces were somewhere on the banks of the Kanawha River. This has
already been mentioned; but as it was an enterprise attended with much
danger, we here copy a detailed account of it.

About the 15th day of July, Colonel Tyler, feeling it important to open
communication with General Cox's forces on the Kanawha, determined to
send a messenger with unwritten dispatches across the country through
the enemy's lines; and as our chaplain could more readily be spared
than any other member of the regiment deemed fitting to undertake the
enterprise, the expedition was proposed to him. He accepted it
willingly, though well aware of its difficulties and dangers. Colonel
Tyler suggested to him to go in the character of a merchant or trader,
so that, if arrested by roving guerillas or any of Wise's patrols, he
could say he was on business to Gauley Bridge, or some other place. But
he declined adopting the suggestion, as involving a possible lie, and
asked to be left to his own resources.

Hastily divesting himself of every tell-tale mark of name, residence,
or connection with the service, mounted on a blooded mare, captured
from some guerrillas a few days before, and taking no rations but a
bunch of cigars, an hour after receiving the order he started. It was a
ride of a hundred and twenty miles through the enemy's country, by
highways, and by-ways, and no ways at all, nearly half of it at night,
sometimes alone, full of adventures, amusing and otherwise, and
involving some narrow escapes from the enemy, but completely
successful.

On the morning of the third day, at daylight, he struck the Kanawha,
four miles below the mouth of the Pocotaligo; and there, for the first
time, got word of General Cox, and learned that his camp was only four
miles up the river. It was Sunday morning. He was soon at the general's
quarters, and in the language of the chaplain himself, "received such a
welcome as that genial man and accomplished Christian gentleman knows
how to give." General Cox refused permission to him to return to us by
the way he had come. He therefore remained with the general for the
time; was with him at the capture of Charleston, and in the pursuit of
Wise to Gauley Bridge, from whence he joined us again. Surviving
members of the old Seventh will remember "the three times-three" cheers
of each company in succession, as the chaplain rode along the line. We
were on the march, a long distance from where he had left us, had not
heard a word from him or of him, and had thought him lost; his arrival,
safe and sound, coming from the direction of the enemy, was as one from
the dead, or from Richmond.

At the battle of Cross Lanes he bore a gallant part, remaining with the
command during the entire affair, and leaving only when all hope of
saving the day had expired. He escaped, with others, through a gap in
the enemy's lines, caused by well-directed volleys of musketry from the
regiment. The same day he came into Gauley Bridge, after having
rendered much service in bringing off the wagon-train. He soon after
visited Cross Lanes, under a flag of truce, for the purpose of looking
after our killed and wounded, as well as to learn the fate of those
taken prisoners. While within the enemy's lines, he was treated
civilly, but was refused the privilege of administering to the wounded,
as well as visiting the prisoners. He therefore returned, without
having accomplished, in the least degree, the object of his visit. The
chaplain was soon after ordered to Charleston, where the scattered
members of the Seventh had been collected.

While at this place he formed an agreeable acquaintance with many
gentlemen of learning and ability, at whose houses he was a frequent
visitor; and it may be truly said that on such occasions he added much
to the fund of enjoyment.

While the regiment was at Charleston, a misunderstanding arose between
the chaplain and Colonel Tyler, by reason of which the former felt it
his duty to resign. His resignation was in due time accepted, and he
was honorably mustered out of the service; the esteem and regrets of
the entire command going with him to his home. While with the regiment
his conduct had been above suspicion, and his sudden departure caused
universal gloom.

Shortly after returning to his home in Cleveland, he was called to be
pastor of a church at Georgetown, District of Columbia, which is both
large and influential.

Not forgetting the cause of his country and her suffering soldiery, he
is now engaged, in addition to his pastoral labors, in attending to the
wants of the sick and wounded soldiers at the various hospitals in the
vicinity of his home. Many a poor soldier of the republic will remember
the words of consolation which have fallen on his ear from the lips of
this devoted Christian.

In the personal appearance of Chaplain Brown, alone, there is a
character. His light, fragile figure, erect and graceful carriage,
strikes one as peculiarly fitting to his elegant, chaste, and mature
intellect. He leaves an impression on the mind as lasting as it is
positive. In his company the dark moments are lighted up. Generous and
manly, he would distribute even his happiness among his fellows, were
it possible. There are few men more companionable than he; and few ever
won the love of their fellow-men equal to him. Endowed with rare
conversational powers and a pleasing address, he always commands the
attention of those around him. In public speaking, the first impression
he makes upon the mind of the hearer is not such as would lead him to
expect a flowery discourse; but as the speaker proceeds, it becomes
evident that dry logic is not his only gift. His life is a constant
reflection of truth. He takes a great grasp on eternal things; and
lives greatly by seeking, as the one high aim of his studies, his
labors, and his prayers, the supreme glory of God in the everlasting
welfare of man. May such samples of Christian character be multiplied,
till all the world has learned how great is God, and how great is
goodness.


CHAPLAIN D. C. WRIGHT.

D. C. Wright was appointed chaplain during the winter of 1861. He
reported to the regiment at Patterson's Creek, Virginia.

He was with the regiment at the battle of Winchester, where he rendered
much assistance in caring for the wounded. He now followed the fortunes
of the Seventh until its arrival at Port Republic, at which battle he
served as aid to General Tyler. During the entire engagement he was
much exposed, carrying dispatches in the most gallant style to
different parts of the field. He was mentioned in the official reports
for gallant conduct. After this battle he left for his home, and
finally sent in his resignation, which was duly accepted.

Before the war broke out he was a minister of the Methodist Church, and
acquired no little reputation as a revivalist preacher.


LIEUT.-COL. GILES W. SHURTLIFF.[5]

At the beginning of the rebellion, Giles W. Shurtliff was one of the
teachers in the college at Oberlin. Immediately after the bombardment
and capture of Fort Sumter, he organized a company, principally from
among his pupils, and reported at Camp Taylor. He was with the regiment
in its toilsome marches in Western Virginia, during which he was always
at his post. During the affair at Cross Lanes he was taken prisoner,
and now began those terrible hardships which no pen can describe, nor
imagination picture. Prison life is a sort of living death,--a state of
abeyance, where the mind is thrown back upon itself; where time,
although passing, seems to stop, and the great world outside, to stand
still. Through all this trial, and hardship, and misery, Colonel
Shurtliff passed, without weakening his faith or his patriotism. He
returned to his home, after more than a year's imprisonment, as firm in
the support of the Government as ever. After allowing himself a short
rest, he served in the Army of the Potomac on staff-duty; but was soon
after made lieutenant-colonel of the Fifth United States Colored
Infantry. He has since greatly distinguished himself in the numerous
battles in the vicinity of Richmond. He is at the present time at his
post, where he will probably remain until the rebellion is crushed, and
the Government vindicated.

          [5] The writer would be glad to give an extended account of
          the gallant services of Colonel Shurtliff in the bloody
          battles before Richmond and Petersburg, but has not received
          the necessary facts.


COLONEL ARTHUR T. WILCOX.

Arthur T. Wilcox is a native of Ohio, and entered the service as
second-lieutenant of Company E. On the organization of the regiment for
the three years' service, he was made a first-lieutenant, and assigned
to the same company. He served with much credit in Western Virginia,
until the Cross Lanes affair, when he was taken prisoner. He remained
within the prison-walls of the enemy for more than a year, most of the
time in Charleston, South Carolina, suffering every hardship; but
coming out as true and pure a patriot as when he went in, he again
joined his regiment, and was soon after made a captain. He now took
part in all the battles of the West, in which the regiment was
engaged,--Lookout Mountain, Mission Ridge, Ringgold, and Sherman's
battles in the march on Atlanta. He came home with the regiment, and
was in due time mustered out. He was not, however, permitted to remain
long at home, for, when new regiments were forming, he was made a
colonel, and assigned to the One Hundred and Seventy-seventh Regiment.
He soon after joined his command, and was almost immediately ordered to
the front. He joined General Thomas' forces, then falling back before
the forces of General Hood. Arriving at Franklin, he was engaged in the
bloody battle fought there, and greatly distinguished himself. He soon
after arrived at Nashville with the army. The rebel army immediately
advanced; and the two armies stood face to face, at the same time
gathering strength for a desperate conflict. The Union army was
triumphant, and the rebel hosts were beaten and demoralized. In this
battle, Colonel Wilcox gained new laurels. He now took part in the
pursuit of the scattered forces of Hood.

Every one who has fallen in company with Colonel Wilcox, will remember
him as a genial friend and true gentleman. He has made many friends in
the army as well as at home. He has chosen the law as a profession, and
when "this cruel war is over" the writer wishes him the success his
many virtues and talents merit.


LIEUT.-COL. JAMES T. STERLING.

James T. Sterling entered the service as first-lieutenant of Captain De
Villiers' company. On the organization of the regiment for the three
years' service, he was made captain. While at Camp Dennison he labored
diligently to perfect his command in both drill and discipline; and
when it entered the field it was second to none, so far as these
essentials were concerned.

While in Western Virginia, Captain Sterling was on many scouts, in
which service he showed great skill and bravery. Such adventures were
very much to his liking.

In the affair at Cross Lanes he won the respect of all those who were
witness to his coolness and daring. During the march to Charleston he
made a good account of himself, being one of the most active in his
labors, and among the wisest in his opinions.

He now followed the regiment to the East, where he engaged in all the
marches and skirmishes which took place. At the battle of Winchester he
commanded two companies; leading them into the hottest fire like a
veteran. During the entire action he stood on the hill urging the men
forward, regardless of the great danger to which he himself was
exposed. He came through the battle, however, without a scratch, but
with some holes in his clothing.

He now took part in the long chase of Jackson up the Valley, and from
thence to Fredericksburg and back again; but was not in the battle of
Port Republic, his company having been detailed for headquarters guard.

Very soon after this engagement he was made lieutenant-colonel of the
One Hundred and Third Regiment, at that time about to be raised in the
vicinity of Cleveland. He soon after reported to this regiment and was
assigned to duty. He went with it to the field; but, after a limited
period, was assigned the position of inspector-general on the staff of
General Cox. He filled this position with much credit to himself, until
early in the year 1864, when he resigned and returned to his home in
Cleveland.

Colonel Sterling, as an officer, was much esteemed. As a companion, he
was much admired. His easy manners and agreeable conversation gathered
about him many friends. Every one regretted his departure from the
Seventh; he had been with it through so many trials and dangers, that
he was closely identified with it. His company thought well of him,
and, therefore, his unexpected departure caused many regrets.


COLONEL JOEL F. ASPER.

Joel F. Asper was born in Huntington, Adams County, Pennsylvania, on
the 20th day of April, 1822. When he was but five years old his father
removed to Farmington, Ohio, by the slow process of a four-horse team
and Pennsylvania wagon. The county of Trumbull was then but sparsely
settled.

Until eighteen years of age he assisted his father in clearing a farm,
at the same time attending a district school in winter. This is all the
school education he ever had; all other education being acquired by his
own exertion and application to study out of school.

Having a passion for reading and writing, he was led to study law. But
previous to this, however, he commenced teaching a school in
Southington, but, for some reason, left it after one month's
experience. Early in the year 1842, we find him in the law-office of
Crowell and Abel, at Warren, Ohio, and working for his board at the
American Hotel.

In 1843, he carried the Western Reserve Chronicle through several
townships, and during the entire year did not miss a trip.

In August, 1844, he was admitted to the bar, but remained with General
Crowell till 1845, when he learned the daguerrean business, but not
succeeding in this, in October following opened a law-office at Warren.
His first year's practice netted him over four hundred dollars, and it
increased from year to year.

In 1846 be was elected a justice of the peace, and in the following
year was married to Miss Elizabeth Brown.

In 1847 he was elected prosecuting attorney. In 1849, was announced as
one of the editors of the Western Reserve Chronicle; and wrote, during
the campaign of that year, all of the leading political articles
published in its columns. During the summer of 1848, Mr. Parker,
proprietor of the paper, left for a pleasure excursion, and while
absent, Mr. Asper, being left in charge, took ground against General
Taylor. During this campaign he did much towards developing
anti-slavery sentiments in the party. For this conduct he was denounced
by the minority of his party. At this time he made a speech before a
Whig convention, which is said to have been the best effort of his
life. Carrying out these sentiments, he sustained Martin Van Buren for
the presidency, and in the following year ran for prosecuting attorney
on the Free-Soil ticket, but was defeated.

In 1850 he moved to Chardon, Ohio, and edited a Free-Soil paper until
1852, when, it proving a losing business, he returned to Warren, where
he again commenced the practice of the law, which he continued until
the breaking out of the rebellion, in 1861. He was among the first in
Northern Ohio to tender a company to the Governor. It marched to camp
on the 25th of April. He served in the regiment until March, 1863, when
he was honorably mustered out of the United States service. During this
time he took part in the affair of Cross Lanes and the battle of
Winchester, in which last engagement he was severely wounded. After the
Cross Lanes affair he accompanied a detachment of four hundred men to
Charleston, rendering much assistance during the march. He was promoted
to lieutenant-colonel during his service with the regiment, in which
position he commanded the regiment in the retreat of Pope's army from
the Rapidan.

On returning to Warren he opened an office, and in August organized the
Fifty-first Regiment National Guards, and was elected its colonel.

When, in the spring of 1864, the corps was ordered into the field, his
regiment was among the first to move. It went to Johnson's Island, and
while there the noted John H. Morgan commenced a raid through Kentucky.
To resist him, several militia regiments were ordered to the front;
among them was the Fifty-first, now become the One Hundred and
Seventy-first.

Arriving at Cincinnati, he reported to General Hobson, and was ordered
to Keller's Bridge by train. Soon after getting off the cars, it was
attacked by the enemy in overwhelming numbers. After a gallant fight of
six hours, the brave little band of heroes was compelled to surrender.
No regiment of new troops ever did better: it made itself a name which
history will perpetuate.

The regiment was mustered out on the 20th of August, 1864. Asper now
perfected his arrangements to move to Missouri, which he put into
execution in October following. He is now engaged in the practice of
law at Chillicothe, in the above State.


MAJOR W. R. STERLING.

The subject of this sketch entered the service as Captain of Company I.
He carried with him some considerable military experience, having been
connected with a company in his native State. He accompanied the
regiment in its Western Virginia campaign, taking an honorable part in
the affair at Cross Lanes. He was with the detachment in its march over
the mountains to Charleston, during which he rendered great assistance,
contributing largely towards bringing the command off in safety.

From Charleston he returned to his home on leave, but soon after
returned to his command, accompanied by a number of recruits. He now
took part in the various marches and skirmishes occurring in the
mountain department of Eastern Virginia. He was not in the battles of
Winchester or Port Republic; but was in all the marches occurring
before and after those engagements. At the battle of Cedar Mountain he
did yeoman's service. His company was led with such coolness and
bravery, that many a rebel was made to bite the dust. He now remained
with the regiment until General Hooker came to the command of the Army
of the Potomac, when Captain Sterling was assigned a position on his
staff. In this capacity he served until after the battle of
Chancellorsville. A short time after this engagement he was taken
prisoner by a roving band of rebels, and conveyed to Richmond, where he
was for some time confined in prison. He was finally taken further
south to another prison, from which, in the summer of 1864, he escaped;
and after spending some time in the mountains, during which he suffered
many hardships, finally joined the Union forces in Tennessee.

He was a brave and competent officer. While on Hooker's staff he was
promoted to major.


MAJOR E. J. KREIGER.

The subject of this sketch is a native of Germany, and entered the
service as a sergeant in a company composed of his fellow-countrymen.
He very soon rose to the rank of lieutenant, and before the term of
service of the regiment expired, to that of captain. He was in the
following battles and skirmishes: Cross Lanes, Winchester, Port
Republic, Cedar Mountain, Antietam, Dumfries, Chancellorsville,
Gettysburg, Mission Ridge, Lookout Mountain, Ringgold, and in all the
engagements in which his regiment took part in Sherman's march on
Atlanta. No officer can show a prouder record. He was always with his
command, and on all occasions showed great bravery and gallantry, as
well as ability to command.

Immediately after the Seventh was mustered out, he was appointed major
of the One Hundred and Seventy-seventh Regiment, and left soon after
for the field. He now added to the above glorious list of battles that
of Franklin, where he fully sustained the honors that he gained while
with the old Seventh. He is at the present time in General Thomas'
army, where he will remain, if his life is spared, until the overthrow
of the rebellion.


CAPTAIN J. B. MOLYNEAUX.

The subject of this sketch was born, January 1, 1840, at Ann Arbor, in
the State of Michigan. At the age of four years his father removed to
Penn Yan, New York, and soon after to Bath and Elmira, in the same
State. In 1854, young Molyneaux went to Belville, Ohio, and commenced
the study of medicine in the office of Dr. Whitcomb. He remained for
nearly a year, when, not liking the study, he went to Cleveland, Ohio,
and entered the job-office of John Williston, where he learned the art
of printing.

Having a natural liking for military life, he joined the Light Guards,
and afterwards the Sprague Cadets, of which he was appointed
drill-master. On the first call for troops, he joined a company being
raised by Captain De Villiers, as a private, being among the first to
enroll his name. Soon after arriving in camp, he was appointed a
sergeant, and, immediately after, drill-master for the non-commissioned
officers of the regiment. On the three years' organization, he was
unanimously chosen first-lieutenant by the vote of his company. He
remained with this company during the earlier part of the campaign in
Western Virginia, taking a gallant part in the affair of Cross Lanes,
as also in the final march of Major Casement's detachment to
Charleston. After this action, he was placed in command of Company E,
which command he held until January, 1862, and then being relieved,
only for the purpose of receiving the appointment of adjutant.

He took part in all the marches and skirmishes in both Western and
Eastern Virginia. At the battle of Winchester, he was mentioned, in the
official report of his colonel, for gallantry on the battle-field. At
the battle of Port Republic, he won new laurels, being constantly under
the enemy's fire. In the fearful struggle at Cedar Mountain, he
particularly distinguished himself. He was, for a limited time, in
command of the regiment, during which he extricated it from a position,
where, under a less skilful leader, it would have been captured. In
this gallant exploit, Molyneaux lost two horses, one of them being
pierced by fourteen bullets.

In September, 1862, he was appointed captain, after having waived rank
three times. This position he held until March, 1863, when, on account
of wounds and ill-health, he was compelled to resign. In the mean time,
he was with the regiment in all its marches, as well as the battle of
Antietam and the affair at Dumfries.

On his return home he followed his occupation of a printer, until the
governor's call for the National Guard, when he again entered the
service as a captain. His regiment being stationed in the defences of
Washington, he was placed in command of a fort, which was, a part of
the time, garrisoned by several companies. After the expiration of his
term of service, he returned to his home in Cleveland, and resumed his
business.


CAPTAIN CHARLES A. WEED.

Charles A. Weed was born, March 30, 1840, in Lake County, Ohio. He
enlisted in Captain John N. Dyer's company, on the 22d day of April,
1861. After its arrival in camp, he was made orderly-sergeant, in which
capacity he developed fine military talent, such as led his company, at
an early time, to look upon him as a proper person for promotion when a
vacancy should occur. Therefore, on the final organization of the
company for the three years' service, he was made a first-lieutenant.
He was with the regiment during the entire Western Virginia campaign,
taking part in the skirmish at Cross Lanes, in which he took command of
the company after the death of Captain Dyer, which position he held
until January, 1862, when he was relieved by an officer promoted to the
captaincy by reason of superiority of rank. He was soon after made
captain, February 5, 1862, and assigned to Company E.

He now took part in all the marches and skirmishes in Eastern Virginia,
and also in the battle of Winchester, where he displayed great
gallantry. After this battle, he commanded his company in the pursuit
of Jackson to Harrisonburg, and in the toilsome march to
Fredericksburg, and the return to Front Royal. He was now in the
advance to Port Republic. In the battle which succeeded, he displayed
great courage, as well as ability to command. He took part in the
battle of Cedar Mountain and Antietam, and also in the skirmish at
Dumfries. On the 22d of February, 1863, he resigned, and returned to
his home.

There were few better officers in the regiment. He was prompt in the
discharge of his duty, seldom questioning the propriety of an order
emanating from a superior, but executing it at once. In his intercourse
with his fellow-soldiers, he was frank and courteous, and all cherished
the kindest feelings towards him.


CAPTAIN JUDSON N. CROSS.

The subject of this sketch is a native of Ohio. When the war broke out
he was attending college at Oberlin, Ohio. He immediately enrolled
himself in Captain Shurtliff's company, and was soon after made a
first-lieutenant. He served with his company in Western Virginia, with
much credit to himself and profit to his country. At the skirmish of
Cross Lanes he was brave, and showed that he was competent to command.
During the affair, he was severely wounded in the arm and taken
prisoner. At the battle of Carnifex Ferry, which followed soon after,
he was recaptured by the forces under General Rosecrans. Being unfit
for service, he now went to his home, where it was thought he might
recover sufficiently to rejoin his command. But after the expiration of
some months, being still unable for service, he was ordered on
recruiting service at Cleveland, Ohio. He was engaged in this work
until the fall of 1862, when he was honorably mustered out of the
service, on account of the unimproved condition of his wound. In the
mean time, however, he had been promoted to a captaincy.


CAPTAIN JOHN F. SCHUTTE.

Entered the service as a lieutenant in Captain Wiseman's company, and
on its organization for three years, was made its captain. He was with
the regiment until just before its affair at Cross Lands, when, being
on picket duty on the banks of the Gauley River, he imprudently crossed
over, and after advancing some miles into the enemy's country, was
fired upon by a body of cavalry, concealed in the bushes, and mortally
wounded. After being taken to an old building close by, he was left, at
his own request, and soon after expired. The rebels buried him on the
spot. No braver officer ever entered the service. Had he lived, he
would undoubtedly have distinguished himself.

At the time of his death, no officer had a better reputation. His
company was somewhat difficult to manage, but while he was in command,
it was not surpassed for discipline, and hardly equalled. He was kind
to every one who did his duty, but when one of his men failed to do
that, he came down upon him with a heavy hand.

His loss was deeply felt throughout the entire command. His company had
recognized in him a leader, and they deplored his loss.


LIEUT. LOUIS G. DE FOREST.

Louis G. De Forest was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on the 9th of
September, 1838. His youth was spent in the city schools, where he
acquired a fair education. In 1853, at the age of fifteen years, he
entered the store of N. E. Crittenden. It is a high compliment to his
industry and business habits, that he has remained in his employ since
that date, with the exception of the time that he spent in the military
service.

Having a natural taste for military life, in 1859 he joined a company
of Light Guards as a private, but soon rose to the positions of
corporal, sergeant, and finally lieutenant. The latter position he
filled with credit, until the rebellion broke out, when, on the
organization of the Sprague Cadets, for three months' service, he
hastened to enroll his name. He was soon made orderly sergeant, which
position he held when the company went into camp. After the regiment
arrived in Camp Dennison, he was elected a second-lieutenant of his
company. And on its final organization for the three years' service, he
was chosen its adjutant, by a vote of its officers, and soon after
received his commission, with the rank of first-lieutenant.

He accompanied the regiment in its arduous Western Virginia campaign,
and during the time Colonel Tyler commanded a brigade, he served as
acting assistant adjutant-general. At the affair at Cross Lanes, he
took a prominent as well as gallant part. He was among the number of
those who made the march over the mountains to Elk River and
Charleston.

He accompanied the regiment to Kelly's department, where he again acted
as acting assistant adjutant-general to Colonel Tyler, serving in this
capacity until his resignation, which took place in March.

When the National Guard was organized, he raised a company, and was
made its captain. In this position he served during the one hundred
days' campaign of this corps, being stationed in a fort in the vicinity
of Washington.

Every one who came in connection with the Seventh Regiment will
remember the stentorian voice and soldierly bearing of its first
adjutant.


LIEUTENANT HALBERT B. CASE.

Halbert B. Case was born in Trumbull County, Ohio, May 3, 1838. His
father being a farmer, he was bred to that occupation. At the age of
sixteen years he entered the W. R. Seminary, at Farmington, Ohio,
preparatory to entering college. After a year and a half spent in this
institution of learning, he went to Oberlin, where he pursued his
studies for more than three years, when, his health failing him, he was
compelled to leave college.

During the winter of 1859, his health being somewhat improved, he went
to Tiffin, Ohio, and commenced the study of the law. He remained here
two winters. In the spring of 1860, being in indifferent health, he
returned to his home in Mecca, Ohio, where he pursued his studies
privately for some months. After which he went to Warren, and studied
law with Forrist and Burnett until the breaking out of the rebellion.

On the 19th day of April, 1861, deeming it his duty to serve his
country, he enlisted in Asper's company, the first organized in the
county. He was soon after made orderly-sergeant. When the three years'
organization was made, he was unanimously chosen a lieutenant by a vote
of his company.

He served honorably during the campaign in Western Virginia, taking an
active part in the affair of Cross Lanes, sharing the fortunes of the
detachment under Major Casement.

Among the first promotions that were made in November, 1861, he was
remembered by the authorities, and appointed a first-lieutenant. He
accompanied the regiment to Eastern Virginia, where he joined the
expedition to Romney and Blue's Gap.

While at Patterson's Creek he felt it his duty to resign his
commission, on account of a personal difficulty with Colonel Tyler. He
therefore left the regiment early in February, with the regrets of the
entire command.

He was not long permitted to remain at home, for his former services
were acknowledged by giving him a commission as captain in the
Eighty-fourth Regiment, which was being organized for three months'
service. This position being accepted, he proceeded with his regiment
to Cumberland, Maryland. Soon after its arrival he was made
provost-marshal and commandant of the post. In this position he won an
enviable reputation. Among his first orders was one against the use and
sale of intoxicating liquors, which he proceeded to enforce in an
effectual manner; and thus materially aided in maintaining order and
quiet at the post.

After nearly five months' service, when the regiment was mustered out,
he was appointed colonel, for the purpose of reorganizing it for three
years' service. He immediately entered upon this task; but owing to the
number of regiments at that time being organized in Northern Ohio, he
was but partially successful. The regiment being finally consolidated
with the One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Ohio, he returned to his home.

He soon after entered the law-school at Ann Arbor, Michigan; and after
a year and a half spent at this university, he graduated, with the
degree of L. L. B. Soon after, he returned home, married, and commenced
the practice of his profession at Youngstown, Ohio.


LIEUTENANT HENRY Z. EATON.

Lieutenant Eaton entered the service as a private, but on the three
years' organization was made a second-lieutenant. He was with the
regiment constantly during the campaign in Western Virginia, and always
at his post. He took an important part in the Cross Lanes affair, and
in the march of Major Casement's detachment.

He now went to the East with the regiment, when Colonel Tyler being
given a brigade, he was assigned to his staff as aid-de-camp. He held
this position at the battle of Winchester; and no one in the army did
better service. He was constantly in the saddle, riding fearlessly in
the heat of the battle, a fair mark for the rebels. During the
engagement his horse was wounded. He was mentioned in official reports
for gallant conduct. He soon after took part in the battle of Port
Republic, where he added much to his already well-earned reputation for
courage and other soldierly qualities. He now followed the regiment to
Alexandria, where he returned to his company and to the front of Pope's
army, where he was at the battle of Cedar Mountain, in which he was
severely wounded. He soon after returned to his home, and finally
resigned, on account of disability from wounds.


LIEUTENANT A. H. DAY.

A. H. Day was a lieutenant in company F, in which capacity he
accompanied the regiment in Western and Eastern Virginia, taking part
in the battles of Winchester and Port Republic, in both of which he did
good service. In the latter he was severely wounded in the shoulder, by
reason of which he was soon after compelled to resign.


LIEUTENANT WILLIAM D. SHEPHERD.

William D. Shepherd entered the service as a private in company D. He
was soon after made a sergeant, and at Camp Dennison, orderly. He
followed the fortunes of his company through the wilds of Western
Virginia till the affair at Cross Lanes, where he showed great
gallantry. He went with his company to Charleston, where, in the
absence of Lieutenant Weed, he took command. During this time the
company was detailed to guard a party who were engaged in erecting a
telegraph line from Point Pleasant to Gauley Bridge. In this service he
gave good satisfaction to all concerned in the undertaking.

He now remained with his command until a few days before the battle of
Winchester, when he was compelled to leave the field on account of
inflammation in one of his eyes. It had become very painful long before
he would consent to go to the rear. A fever soon following, he was
completely prostrated. He now went to his home, where he was engaged in
the recruiting service. He returned to his regiment late in the summer,
and having been promoted to first-lieutenant, was immediately made
adjutant. He served with the regiment in this capacity until after the
affair at Dumfries, when he was compelled to resign on account of
ill-health.

After his return home he did great service in recruiting. In the winter
of 1863-4 he canvassed Lake and Geanga counties, and was the means of
enlisting a large number of men. On these occasions he made speeches,
of which any public speaker might well be proud.

In the fall of 1864 he raised a company for the National Guard, which
he commanded in the one hundred days' service. Returning to his home,
he was appointed a quartermaster, with the rank of captain, and
assigned to a division in the Twenty-third Army Corps.

His promotion was won in the field, and therefore honorable. His
commission as second-lieutenant bears the date of November 25th, 1861;
and that of first-lieutenant early in the following year.

Every one who has fallen in company with Lieutenant Shepherd will
remember him as a genial friend and profitable companion. His frankness
and courtesy have made him many friends. To know him, is to esteem him.
I doubt whether he has an enemy in the world. He has always been a warm
supporter of the Government, although not an American citizen by birth,
having been born in Canada.


LIEUTENANT E. HUDSON BAKER.

Lieutenant Baker entered the service in Company C. He remained with the
regiment during its entire campaign in Western Virginia, doing good
service. At the affair at Cross Lanes, he was particularly conspicuous
for gallantry. He now took command of the company, which he held during
the remainder of his term of service. He was in the battle of
Winchester, where he commanded his company with great credit to
himself. As an officer, he was very popular with his command; as a
companion, he was sociable and benevolent. He was finally compelled to
resign from ill-health, but much against his wishes. He desired to
remain until the close of his regular term of service, and then return
with his old comrades; but his increasing debility would not admit.


LIEUTENANT RALPH LOCKWOOD.

Lieutenant Ralph Lockwood entered the regiment, on its first
organization, in Company E. He served creditably through the Western
Virginia campaign, taking part in the skirmish at Cross Lanes, and the
battles of Winchester and Port Republic. In these battles he was
distinguished for personal courage. By constant exposure, he contracted
a rheumatic difficulty, which finally compelled him to resign, at a
time when his services were much needed in the regiment.


LIEUTENANT T. T. SWEENEY.

Lieutenant T. T. Sweeney entered the service in Company B. He saw much
service in Western Virginia, and was in every respect a gallant
officer. At Cross Lanes, he made an honorable record. Soon after this
skirmish, he resigned his commission, and returned to his home in
Cleveland, Ohio.


LIEUTENANT EDWARD W. FITCH.

Lieutenant Fitch entered the service in Company I. He served faithfully
until after the skirmish of Cross Lanes, in which he bore a gallant
part. While at Charleston, he resigned his commission, and returned to
his home.


LIEUTENANT A. J. WILLIAMS.

Lieutenant Williams came into the regiment as second-lieutenant of
Company D, which position he filled with much credit till after the
affair at Cross Lanes, when he resigned his commission. At the time the
above skirmish took place he was sick, and therefore did not take part
in it. Previous to this he had toiled on with his company, through all
its terrible marches and dreary bivouacks; and for this is entitled to
the gratitude of the country.




OUR DEAD.


COLONEL WILLIAM R. CREIGHTON AND LIEUT.-COLONEL ORRIN J. CRANE.

Colonel William R. Creighton was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in
June, 1837. At the age of ten years, he entered a shoe-store, where he
remained for two years; after which he entered a commercial college,
where he remained for six months. But these pursuits were not to his
liking--he had no taste for accounts. We next find him, at the age of
thirteen years, in the job-office of McMillin, in Pittsburgh, where he
remained for four years, completing his apprenticeship. The year
following, he went to Cleveland, Ohio, and entered the Herald office,
where he remained till the fall of 1860, with the exception of one
winter spent in a job-office in Chicago.

He united with the fire companies of both Pittsburgh and Cleveland, and
was an active and zealous member. In 1858, he joined the military
organization known as the Cleveland Light Guards, and soon after became
a sergeant, and a lieutenant. He advanced in rank without any
effort--it was a matter of course.

When the rebellion broke out, his love of adventure would not permit
him to remain at home; but he immediately set himself at work
organizing a company, which was completed in a few days, and, on the
22d day of April, marched to Camp Taylor. He immediately commenced
drilling his company, and with such success, that it took the lead of
all then in camp.

At this time his military genius shone so conspicuously that he was
looked on by all as the future leader of the regiment.

All will remember with what skill and pride he led the regiment in its
first march. It was on a beautiful Sabbath morning; and as the young
soldier, with a proud step, took his position at the head of the
column, every eye was turned upon him in admiration; one could see in
the countenances of the men, a willingness to follow such a leader amid
the hail and thunder of battle. Before reaching Camp Dennison, this
admiration warmed into a determination to place him in a position when,
at no distant day, he could be made available as the commander of the
regiment. Therefore, on its arrival at camp, he was elected
lieutenant-colonel, a position which he did not seek, nor intimate to
any that he desired. Very many were desirous of making him colonel.

During the stay of the regiment at Camp Dennison, he took no active
part, seldom being seen on drill, or on duty of any kind. When the
regiment was about leaving, however, he took command, Colonel Tyler
having gone to Virginia in advance of the starting of the regiment.
Previous to the movement, every thing had been arranged in perfect
order; but this arrangement was partially defeated by the indecent
haste of a captain. An unutterable look of scorn and contempt settled
upon the features of Creighton; but not a word passed his lips. He
never entirely forgave that officer for this act of disobedience of
orders, till his death, when all feelings of animosity gave way to
regrets for his loss; for, outside of a disposition to criticise the
conduct of his superiors, he was a brave as well as competent officer.

Arriving at Clarksburg, he turned over the command to Colonel Tyler;
but on arriving at Glenville, he again assumed command, which he held
until reaching Cross Lanes; in the mean time, drilling the regiment
daily when in camp. During this time it improved rapidly; in fact, it
acquired, during this short interval, most of the proficiency it
possessed.

On the march back to Cross Lanes from Twenty-mile Creek, he was with
the advance, in command of the skirmishers. During the affair which
succeeded, at the above place, he bore himself creditably. During the
retreat, his horse fell with him: seizing the holsters, he started on
foot through the underbrush, but soon after saw his horse coming after
him at full speed. He again mounted; but in a short time his horse
again fell, when, for the second time, he abandoned him; but he was
soon joined by his faithful "Johnny," and this time the devoted horse
carried its gallant rider safely to Gauley Bridge.

This misfortune to the regiment completely unmanned him. Meeting a
comrade on the retreat, who was not in the engagement, he burst into
tears, and, grasping his hand, in choked utterances related the story
of their encounter.

While the regiment remained at Charleston, Creighton was in command,
and was untiring in his efforts to advance his command in both drill
and discipline; and I doubt whether any regiment in the field made more
rapid progress towards perfection. It seemed to emulate its leader, who
was ever at his post.

When an order came for five hundred picked men from the regiment to
report to General Benham for duty, in the pursuit of Floyd, he was
chosen to command the detachment. On arriving at Benham's headquarters,
he was given the advance, and, for several days, was separated from
Floyd's camp by a range of mountains only. He was finally given a
brigade, although only a lieutenant-colonel, and ordered across a range
of mountains to the rear of the enemy; but for some reason no attack
was made, and soon after, half of the command was ordered back.

During the pursuit of Floyd, he travelled on foot at the head of his
regiment. When the rebel army was likely to be overtaken, Benham
remarked to him, that "he depended on him to rout the enemy," and gave
him the post of honor; but when the firing became rapid, his regiment
was ordered to the front, where a part of it was engaged in
skirmishing, while the balance were smoking their pipes and engaging in
sports, almost under the guns of the enemy, Creighton enjoying the fun
as well as any in the command.

The detachment returned, after fifteen days' absence, without the loss
of a man, save one injured by the accidental discharge of a gun.

The regiment now went to the East, where, soon after, Tyler was given a
brigade, and Creighton again commanded the regiment.

At the battle of Winchester, which followed soon after, his was the
first regiment in the famous charge of the Third brigade, for which it
acquired such renown. He disagreed with the commanding officer as to
the manner of making the charge, preferring to deploy before advancing,
than to charge a battery in close column. But throwing all personal
feelings and preferences aside, he dashed forward, and finally deployed
his regiment within eighty yards of the enemy's line of battle, and
under a terrible fire of both musketry and artillery. His horse being
shot from under him, he seized a musket, and engaged in the strife,
firing rapidly till near the close of the battle, when he was compelled
to cease for the purpose of executing some order.

On the return of the command to New Market, after the pursuit of
Jackson to near Harrisonburg, the company tents were ordered to be
delivered up; whereupon Creighton was very indignant, and, in
connection with other officers, sent in his resignation. They were
ordered to report to General Shields the next morning. Accordingly,
dressed in their "best," they reported. They were received with all the
politeness that pompous general knew how to assume, with an invitation
to be seated. The general informed them that their resignations would
not be accepted; but remarked, that, "if they _desired_ it, he would
have their names stricken from the army rolls in disgrace." This
witticism rather amused Creighton than otherwise, and he returned to
camp with a much better opinion of the general than he was possessed of
before making his visit.

He now commanded the regiment in its march to Fredericksburg, sharing
with his men the hardships attending the toilsome march; and when, a
few days after, the regiment returned to the Valley, he did much to
cheer the men in that discouraging march.

At Front Royal he remained with his regiment during a heavy storm, to
which it was exposed without tents, disdaining to seek shelter and
comfort while his men were thus exposed.

The men were now very destitute of clothing, especially shoes; but when
ordered, he moved to Columbia Bridge, followed by one hundred men
barefooted. He now went personally to General Shields, but was coldly
received by that general, being subjected to insulting remarks. He came
back to his regiment with that same unutterable expression of contempt
stamped upon his features, which all will remember who served with him
in the field; and getting his men in column, closed in mass, made a
speech. Said he: "I am unable to procure shoes or other comforts for
you; but I will follow these generals until there is not a man left in
the regiment. Forward, company H!" And he did follow them to Port
Republic, where his words came near proving true.

At this battle his bravery and daring were observed by every one. He
made repeated charges with his regiment, the line being as correct as
on dress-parade. After one of these charges, the enemy's cavalry came
dashing towards his regiment, and dispositions were immediately made
for forming a square; but the enemy wisely wheeled, and charged another
regiment. The colonel of this regiment, being unable to get his men in
position, shouted in a stentorian voice: "Men of the ----th, look at
the Seventh Ohio; and d--n you, weep!"

In this battle the regiment made five charges, under the leadership of
Creighton; and each time driving the enemy.

After the battle was over, and the regiment on the retreat, seeing a
wounded captain lying almost within the enemy's lines, he rode up to
his company, and pointing to where he was lying, said: "Do you see your
captain over yonder? _Now, go for him!_" They did go for him, and
succeeded in bringing him from the field in safety.

Only a few were missing from the regiment in this action, although the
list of killed and wounded was fearful.

We next find Creighton at the battle of Cedar Mountain, where a small
division fought the whole of Jackson's army on ground of his own
choosing. Creighton handled his regiment with a dexterity that told
fearfully on the ranks of the enemy. He was finally severely wounded,
and compelled to leave the field. In doing so, he kept his face to the
foe, saying that "no rebel ever saw his back in battle; and never
would." He was taken to Washington, where the bullet was extracted from
his side, which was an exceedingly painful operation. Soon after this
he came to his home; but while still carrying his arm in a sling, he
reported to his regiment.

While at home the battle of Antietam was fought, which was the only one
in which he failed to participate. Soon after his return, the affair at
Dumfries occurred, where, through his ingenuity and skill, Hampton's
cavalry command was defeated by a mere handful of men. For this he was
publicly thanked by Generals Slocum and Geary.

He now took part in the battle of Chancellorsville, where he won new
laurels. It is said that being ordered by General Hooker to fall back,
he refused to do so until able to bring Knapp's Battery safely to the
rear; for which disobedience of orders he was recommended for
promotion. This battery was from his native city, and in it he had many
friends.

Next he was at Gettysburg, where he fought with his accustomed valor.

We now find him at Lookout Mountain and Mission Ridge, in "Hooker's
battle above the clouds," where the victory was so suddenly and
unexpectedly won, that scarcely sufficient time intervened in which to
display valor. It was simply a race for the top of the mountain on the
part of our men; and a corresponding race on the part of the rebels for
the foot of the mountain on the opposite side.

After this battle came the pursuit of Bragg. His rear-guard was
overtaken at Ringgold, Georgia, where it was securely posted on the top
of Taylor's Ridge--a naked eminence. It was madness to undertake to
drive them from this hill, without the use of artillery to cover the
assault; but in the excitement of the moment the order was given. In
this assault Creighton commanded a brigade. Forming his command, he
made a speech. "Boys," said he, "we are ordered to take that hill. I
want to see you walk right up it." After this characteristic speech, he
led his men up the hill. It soon became impossible to advance against
the terrible fire by which they were met; he, therefore, led them into
a ravine, but the rebels poured such a fire into it from all sides,
that the command was driven back. Reaching a fence, Creighton stopped,
and facing the foe, waited for his command to reach the opposite side.
While in this position he fell, pierced through the body with a rifle
bullet. His last words were: "Oh, my dear wife!" and he expired almost
immediately. The brigade now fell rapidly back, carrying the remains of
its idolized commander with it.


Lieutenant-Colonel Orrin J. Crane was born in Troy, New York, in the
year 1829. At three years of age his parents moved to their native
State, Vermont. Soon after, his father died, leaving but limited means
for the support and education of his children. His mother was a
Christian woman, and devoted to her children. From her he received his
first lessons of life; and a worthy teacher he had. He cherished his
mother with the utmost affection, dwelling upon her goodness with
almost child-like simplicity. It was touching to listen to the words of
love and confidence falling for her, from the lips of the sturdy
warrior, who braved the battle-fire without a tremor.

In early youth he went to live with an uncle, and in about 1852 came
with him to Conneaut, Ohio, where he employed himself in mechanical
labor. He spent one year on the Isthmus, and after his return went to
Cleveland, where he engaged in the occupation of a ship-carpenter,
following this trade till the fall of Sumter. While in Cleveland he
associated himself with a military organization.

He entered the service as first-lieutenant in Captain Creighton's
company; and on his promotion, was made captain. He early devoted
himself to the instruction of his company; and it can be said that it
lost nothing of the efficiency it acquired under the leadership of
Creighton.

After the regiment entered the field, his services were invaluable. I
doubt if the entire army contains an officer who has performed more
service, in the same length of time, than Crane. If a bridge was to be
constructed, or a road repaired, he was sent for to superintend it. If
the commissary department became reduced, he was the one to procure
supplies. No undertaking was too arduous for his iron-will to brave.
There was no fear of starvation while the sturdy Crane was present. All
relied on him with the utmost confidence, and no one was ever
disappointed in him.

At the affair of Cross Lanes, where he first came under fire, he was
more than a hero; he seemed possessed of attributes of a higher nature.
He moved amid that sheet of flame, as if possessed of a soul in
communion with a higher power. He inspired his men with true courage.
They stood like a wall, and fell back only when ordered by their
leader, then dashed through the strong line of the enemy with a bravery
which was truly sublime. The enemy, although five to one, hesitated,
swayed backward, and finally fled, so severely punished, that for the
time they did not pursue. In that long march, over the mountains to
Gauley Bridge, he was still the proud leader.

After his arrival at the above place, he was sent out to the front, up
New River, where he rendered valuable service.

He was in every march and skirmish in both Western and Eastern
Virginia, until, we find the regiment at the battle of Winchester. In
this engagement he showed the same indomitable and true courage. He
held his men to the work of carnage so fearfully, that the enemy's
slain almost equalled his command.

We now find him in every battle in which his regiment was engaged in
the East. Port Republic, Cedar Mountain (where he was slightly
wounded), Antietam, Dumfries, Chancellorsville, and Gettysburg. In all
of these he _led_ his command, and the dead of the enemy left on the
field before it attest how well he led it.

At the battle of Antietam, he commanded the regiment, and during the
latter part of the engagement, a brigade.

Before the regiment left for the West, he was made lieutenant-colonel;
a position which his ability and long, as well as faithful, service of
his country rendered him eminently qualified to fill.

Arriving in the West, he commanded the regiment in the battles of
Lookout Mountain and Mission Ridge, where he added new laurels to his
already imperishable name. At fatal Ringgold, he again commanded the
regiment. He led it up the steep ascent, where the whistling of bullets
made the air musical; and where men dropped so quietly that they were
scarcely missed, except in the thinned ranks of the command. The
regiment had not recovered from the shock produced by the announcement
of the death of Creighton, when the noble Crane, on whom all hearts
were centred in the fearful peril of that hour, fell at the feet of his
devoted comrades, pierced through the forehead by a rifle bullet. He
spoke not a word--his strong heart ceased to beat; and his soul took
its flight from its blood-red tenement, and from the confusion of
battle, to the land of patriot spirits. He fell so far in the advance,
that his men were driven back before possessing themselves of his
body,--but soon after it was recovered.


The sketches of Creighton and Crane now lie in the same path.

After the bodies of the fallen braves had been laid side by side, the
remaining few of a once full regiment gathered around and mourned,--the
silence alone being broken by the tears and sobs of a band of warriors,
grieving for the loss of their chieftains. Was such a scene ever
witnessed? Those forms, now cold and bloody, had often led them on the
field of carnage, to victory and glory; under their leadership the
regiment had been made immortal; and now, in all their pride, and
glory, and chivalry, they had gone down to rise no more. No wonder,
then, that their brave followers paid their last tribute to all that
was mortal of their renowned leaders. It seemed to these mourners, in
their loss the regiment itself was blotted out--that it would no more
be known and honored--that its sun had forever set. But no, many a
brave heart, that stood in that circle, was to be made a sacrifice to
his country; many more hearts were to be left crushed and bleeding for
the loved ones fallen in battle. When the last tear had been shed, and
the last vow made over these fallen braves, the regiment moved away in
profound silence.

While this scene was being enacted afar off among the hills of Georgia,
the peaceful valleys of Ohio were echoing with the lamentations of
friends at home. The hearts of the people of the Western Reserve were
bound by the strong ties of kin and friendship to this gallant
regiment, which had but just made its great sacrifice, and they were
all in mourning. When the news came of this great disaster, it could
not be believed; the friends of the fallen would not give them up. And
it was not until a dispatch was received that their bodies were on the
way home, that it was generally believed. At last, when the people
realized that the sad news was indeed true, meetings were called by the
representatives of all branches of trade and industry. Resolutions of
respect were passed, and preparations made to receive the dead, on
their arrival, in a becoming manner.

When General Hooker learned of the death of Creighton and Crane, he
raised both hands, in surprise and grief, exclaiming, "My God! are they
dead? Two braver men never lived!"

General Butterfield, chief of staff, gave orders to remove the bodies
to the rear. They were conveyed to Chattanooga by Sergeant Tisdell,
where they were met by Quartermaster Loomis, and privates Wetzel,
Shepherd, and Meigs. General Slocum testified his appreciation of their
worth, by accompanying their bodies as far as Tullahoma. When the news
reached him of their death, his grief was so profound, that the stern
veteran burst into tears.

They were taken to Nashville to be embalmed. But little, however, could
be done for Creighton, as he had bled inwardly; his body was therefore
put into a metallic case. Crane's body was embalmed, and placed in a
plain, but neat coffin, till it should arrive in Cleveland and be
transferred to a burial case. Dr. Newbury, of the Sanitary Commission,
rendered much service in this work, after which he accompanied the
remains to Louisville. From this place they were forwarded to
Cincinnati by train, where they were met by the special escort from
Cleveland, consisting of Colonel Hayward, Lieutenant-Colonel J. T.
Sterling, Lieutenant-Colonel Frazee, Captain Baird, Captain Molyneaux,
Captain De Forest, Captain Wiseman, Surgeon Cushing, and Quartermaster
Chapin.

On Sunday morning the train dashed into Cleveland, and stopped at the
foot of Superior-street. Two hearses were in waiting. One for Colonel
Creighton, drawn by four white horses; the other for Lieutenant-Colonel
Crane, drawn by four black horses. Each was draped by American flags
and the usual insignia of mourning.

The remains of Colonel Creighton were now removed from the car to the
hearse, and conveyed to the residence of Mrs. Creighton, on
Bolivar-street. The remains of Lieutenant-Colonel Crane remained under
guard, till the return of the escort, when they were taken to the
residence of the widow.

This bright Sabbath will long be remembered. But a few short Sabbaths
before, the coffined dead left the city of their homes, possessed of
life and hope: looking forward with pride and happiness to the
termination of an honorable career in the service of their country. And
often in their night vigils, over the dying embers of their
picket-fires, had they conversed on the subject, passing the long night
in dreams never to be realized. The remaining few of your followers
have, indeed, long since returned; and although the hearts and feet of
these brave warriors were heavy with the tramp of weary months, yet
your slumber was not disturbed. Long years shall roll away, in which
war's tumult and carnage shall cease; but you shall only be known among
men by your good deeds left behind, and perpetuated in the hearts of
your countrymen.

On the 7th of December the bodies of Creighton and Crane were brought
from the residences of their families and taken to the Council Hall,
for the purpose of lying in state, to be seen by the public. The same
hearses were used as on the arrival of the bodies from the South.

The Council Hall was elegantly and appropriately decorated. In the
centre, within the railing, a handsome canopy had been placed, with
roof of national flags, draped with mourning emblems, suspended from
the ceiling, and trailing at the corners to the ground. Wreaths, loops,
and festoons of black and white edged the canopy. On the inside, from
the centre, hung a large pendant of mourning emblems, beneath which was
the bier on which lay the bodies of the gallant dead.

On the president's desk, at the head of the hall, were portraits of
Colonel Creighton and Lieutenant-Colonel Crane, draped in mourning; and
against the wall, behind the place of the president's seat, was a
life-size portrait of Colonel Creighton, also draped in mourning. Above
this portrait was this inscription, in black letters on white ground:

    "My God! are they dead?
    Two braver men never lived!"

                      --GENERAL HOOKER.

The windows were hung with black, and the gaslights threw a dim, solemn
light over the mournful scene.

The bodies were placed in handsome burial-cases, and the covers
removed, so that they could be seen through the glass fronts. As we
have before mentioned, the body of Colonel Creighton, from the wounds
having bled inwardly, was so much changed, previously to reaching
Nashville, that it was impossible to properly embalm it; and therefore
did not present a natural appearance. That of Lieutenant-Colonel Crane
was in good preservation, and could easily be recognized.

The bodies were guarded by a detachment of members of the old Seventh,
who formed the guard of honor.

The following account of the funeral services is from the Cleveland
Herald of the 9th of December.

"The sad pageant is over. A sorrowing people have paid their tribute of
affection and regret over the remains of the dead heroes. The brave
leaders of the glorious but ill-fated Seventh sleep in their quiet
tomb.

"Tuesday, the 8th, was a bright and beautiful day. Its clear sky and
pleasant atmosphere were strangely similar to that bright Sunday in
May, two years and a half ago, when the Seventh Regiment marched out of
Cleveland on its way to the battle-fields where it was destined to win
such renown. The unclouded sun shed a halo of glory on all that was
left of the brave men who led the old Seventh in many a fight; but who
now were to be laid away in the silent and peaceful tomb.

"The bright day opened on a city of mourners. People gathered on the
streets, waiting for the hour for the funeral. Business was unthought
of, even the latest news by telegraph, exciting as it was, and
calculated to stir the pulse with triumphant joy, failed to engross the
attention. Men spoke of the dead heroes, of their first departure for
the war, of their terrible battles and bloody sacrifices; and of that
last fearful struggle on the hill at Ringgold, where the gallant
leaders laid down their lives for their country, amid their dead and
wounded comrades.

"From every flag-staff the national colors hung at half-mast, and signs
of mourning were everywhere visible. As the hour set for the
commencement of the solemn exercises drew near, business was entirely
suspended throughout the city. The stores were closed, the Federal,
State, and city offices shut their doors, and a Sabbath-like stillness
reigned over the city. Soon came the tramp of armed men, the mournful
wail of bugles, and the funeral roll of the drums, as the troops moved
up to take part in the funeral procession.

"The bodies had remained in the Council Hall over-night, guarded by the
old comrades of the gallant dead. The families and relatives were in
the mayor's office, waiting for the hour of moving the procession. At
half past ten o'clock the bodies were removed from the Council Hall and
placed in hearses which were draped with the national colors, looped up
with mourning emblems.

"The pall-bearers were as follows: For Colonel Creighton--Colonel
Senter, Colonel Whittlesey, Major Mygatt, Lieutenant-Colonel Asper,
Major Seymour, Captain McIlrath, Captain Ransom, Captain Stratton. For
Lieutenant-Colonel Crane--Lieutenant-Colonel Goddard, Lieutenant-Colonel
Sterling, Major Palmer, Captain Drummond, Captain Douglass, Captain
Wilson, Captain Standart, Captain Hill.

"The burial-cases were the best that money could buy. On one was the
following inscription:

    COL. W. R. CREIGHTON,
    7th O. V. I,
    In his 27th year.
    Killed at the Battle of Ringgold,
    Nov. 27th, 1863.

"On the other was the inscription:

    LIEUT.-COL. O. J. CRANE,
    Fell at the Battle of Ringgold,
    Nov. 27th, 1863.

"On each coffin was laid a handsome wreath of immortelles, with the
sword of the dead officer.

"The Twenty-ninth Volunteer Militia were drawn up in line each side of
the way between the Council Hall and the Stone Church, and the mournful
_cortege_ passed through the lane so formed, Leland's Band playing
a dirge. The hearse was followed by the mourners in carriages--Governor
Brough, Surgeon McClurg, of the United States Military Hospital, the
City Council, and City and County Officers, all wearing crape badges.

"Thousands of people lined the way, and crowded around the church with
the hope of getting in; but there was not a sound from them, as the
procession passed on to the church. And such perfect order and decorum
we never before saw in such a vast concourse.


IN THE CHURCH.

"At the church--as indeed throughout the whole of the obsequies--the
most perfect arrangements had been made, and were carried out. The
reading-desk was draped with flags and crape. Directly in front was a
stand with an elegant bouquet of flowers, and below this another stand,
draped with national colors, on which rested the two coffins, side by
side.

"The silk banner of the Seventh, presented by the city after Cross
Lanes, and bearing the names of several battles, was displayed against
the reading-desk. It was pierced and rent by showers of bullets and
shell in many a hard-fought battle.

"The families and relatives of the deceased were placed in the seats
immediately in front of the bodies. On either side of the coffins sat
the pallbearers. Directly behind the mourners sat about a dozen or more
of the members of the old Cleveland Light Guard, the company commanded
by Colonel Creighton before the war, and of which Lieutenant-Colonel
Crane was a member. They wore crape badges, and had with them the
company flag, draped in mourning.

"Near the reading-desk were seated Governor Brough, Surgeon McClurg,
and other invited guests, the committees, city council, city officers,
county officers, the clergy of the city and neighborhood, members of
the old Seventh, members of the old Cleveland Light Guard, soldiers
from the Military Hospital, members of the Typographical Union,
ship-carpenters, and other friends of the deceased. The body of the
church was packed tightly with citizens, of whom the greater part were
ladies, preference being given to them in the selection of seats. The
Twenty-ninth Regiment stood in the aisles.

"During the entry of the procession to the church, the organ played a
voluntary suitable to the occasion. At half-past eleven o'clock the
funeral ceremonies in the church commenced with an invocation of the
Divine blessing by Rev. S. W. Adams, of the First Baptist Church, who
afterwards read appropriate passages of Scripture.

"The choir then sang the Ninetieth Psalm:

    "'O God! our help in ages past,
      Our help in years to come;
    Our shelter from the stormy blast,
      And our eternal home;

    "'Beneath the shadow of Thy throne,
      Thy saints have dwelt secure;
    Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
      And our defence is sure.

    "'Before the hills in order stood,
      Or earth received her name,
    From everlasting Thou art God--
      To endless years the same.

    "'Thy word commands our flesh to dust:
      Return ye sons of men!
    All nations rose from earth at first,
      And turn to earth again.

    "'O God! our help in ages past,
      Our help for years to come:
    Be Thou our guide while troubles last,
      And our eternal home.'

"Rev. Adam Crooks, of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, then made the
following address, at the request of the family of the late Colonel
Creighton:

"'To-day we are in the solemn presence of inexorable death. We are
impressedly reminded that dust we are, and unto dust we must return;
that "death is the mighty leveller of us all;" that "the tall, the
wise, the heroic dead must lie as low as ours." Two lifeless heroes are
before us--

    "'Their swords in rust;
    Their souls with God in heaven, we trust.'

We would do well to pray with the hero of other days: "So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom." Before us
are two more rich offerings which the State of Ohio and Cleveland have
laid upon our country's altar! They were preceded by Wheeler, Lantry,
Pickands, Mahan, Vail, and others. We are here to mourn, to honor, and
to bury the noble dead! They were the pride of our city and of Northern
Ohio. Brave and honored representatives of a brave and honored
constituency! Of one thousand eight hundred soldiers who have filled
the ranks of the Seventh Regiment Ohio Volunteer Infantry, but little
over a hundred now report for duty. Many of them sleep in patriots' and
heroes' graves. Most of the remainder bear on their persons honorable
marks of their patriotism and bravery. In honoring the representative,
we honor the constituency.

"'But _general_ remarks are not appropriate from me. At the request of
the stricken widow and relatives of Colonel Creighton, I come to utter
a few words of condolence, sympathy, and comfort, in this hour, to
_them_ and _to us all_, of deep affliction. Brother Foot will speak
in behalf of the relatives of Lieutenant-Colonel Crane.

"'Colonel William R. Creighton was born in the City of Pittsburgh,
in the year 1836 or 1837--the records are not in this city. In early
childhood he was bereft of a father. He was baptized by the Rev. Bishop
Uphold, now bishop of Indiana, of the Protestant Episcopal Church.

"'In his early teens, he served in the employ of Mr. A----, in an
extensive shoe establishment. Subsequently, he chose the occupation of
a printer, and spent three years in making himself master of his trade.
Eight years ago he came to this city--was four years in the office of
the Cleveland Herald. Also some six months in the City of Chicago. At
the time of enlistment, he was in the employ of Mr. Nevans of this
city. Early in life, he gave evidence that the tendencies of his nature
were strongly _military_.

"'This was evinced by his connection with companies for drill in
Pittsburgh, Chicago, and this city. When the bloody drama of this
dreadful war was inaugurated, he was lieutenant of the 'Cleveland Light
Guard.' He was not willing that the fair and majestic superstructure,
reared by the superior skill, patient labor, and heroic suffering of
our honored fathers--resting its deep foundations in the inalienability
of the natural rights of all men, and in which the most indigent son of
toil stands before the law the equal peer of merchant princes--should
be torn down by perjured traitors and sworn enemies of mankind; not
willing that these traitors and enemies should bury beneath the
magnificent ruins of this superstructure our strength, and greatness,
and safety, and peace, and very liberties; not willing that this young,
yet powerful republic, should be so dismembered and disintegrated as to
tempt the rapacity, and be an easy prey of the weakest of adverse
powers; not willing that the principle, that '_Capital shall own
labor_,' the non-capitalled be the chattel of the rich, should rule
all over this continent--that labor should be at once unremunerative
and the badge of infamy, that thus there should be eternal antagonism
between the indigent and the affluent, developing in intestine broils
and civil feuds,--nor that the sun of liberty should go down upon an
entire hemisphere, to rise not again for many generations; not willing
that the forum, pulpit, and press should all be enslaved, and
intelligence among the masses be rendered contraband; in brief, not
willing that our _Paradise_ should be converted into a _Pandemonium_.

"'Hence, no sooner had the news reached us of the assault upon Fort
Sumter, and the call of the President for seventy-five thousand
volunteers to rush to the defence of the life of the republic, than,
with all the ardor of his earnest nature, Colonel William R. Creighton
threw his _all_ upon his country's altar, and appealed to his
associates and compeers to do likewise.

"'His success in securing enlistments was commensurate with his zeal
and known military skill. In a few days he was captain of a full
company--the first enlisted in this city--which afterwards became
Company A of the immortal Seventh Regiment Ohio Volunteer Infantry. On
the morning of the 3d of May, 1861, a beautiful Sabbath morning in the
spring, emblem of life, youth, and beauty, this regiment started for
the field of conflict, glory, and of death. And now, on a clear, serene
Sabbath of the December of 1863, the dying month of the year, the first
Sabbath of the month, and in the morning, after many hard-fought
battles, the brave colonel and lieutenant-colonel of the gallant
Seventh came back to say to us, in the mute silence of death, 'We have
done what we could.' In terms and strains of true eloquence you will
soon be told by Brother Peck, how bravely the colonel led the charges
at Cross Lanes, Winchester, Port Republic, Cedar Mountain (not at
Antietam, for he was at home wounded), Dumfries, Chancellorsville,
Gettysburg, Lookout Mountain, and fatal Ringgold,--and how he loved his
brave command, and how they idolized him. But I will not anticipate,
nor need I attempt encomium. His _deeds_ praise him beyond the
capacity of all human eloquence.

"'Of his _social_ and _manly_ qualities, one who knew him well is
permitted to speak, in a letter of Christian sympathy, addressed to his
widow--for the 2d of May, 1861, three days before leaving with his
command, he was united in wedlock with Eleanor L. Quirk, of this city.
In a letter, such as described above, the Rev. Mr. Brown, former pastor
of Westminster Church, and for some months chaplain of the Seventh
Regiment, says:

    "'MRS. COLONEL CREIGHTON: My dear Friend--I have just read in the
    dispatches that your brave husband and Lieutenant-Colonel Crane
    were killed in the late battle at Ringgold, Georgia. Oh, how sad
    this is! Sad to me who loved him; but how _terribly_ sad to you,
    his beloved wife! I cannot write about it. Precious memories of
    hours and days of dangers and hardships, shared together in Western
    Virginia (and of one long, serious conversation about death and
    eternity, as we rode together at midnight through the woods) crowd
    upon me. He was warm-hearted, generous, and noble. He loved his
    country unto death. He was brave, even to rashness. But he has
    gone!'

"'Yes, the warm-hearted friend, the loving brother, the affectionate
son, the devoted husband, the brave soldier, the undying patriot, the
fearless and fiery Creighton, is gone! We are here to-day to honor his
memory, recount his heroic deeds of noble daring, mourn his fall, and
convey his lifeless remains--with those of his brave comrade,
Lieutenant-Colonel Crane--to the tomb of a hero and a patriot.

"'What words of elegiac comfort shall I speak to his numerous personal
and sorrowful friends; his brothers in the union of the same useful and
honorable handicraft; his brave comrades in arms of the noble Seventh,
and other regiments, who are here to attest their affection and sorrow;
his brother in the flesh, who is now left without a brother; his aged
and sorely bereaved mother; and his youthful, but grief-stricken,
widow? How shall _I_, who would take my place with the mourners, speak
words of comfort to you?

"'Let us remember that although our _dear_, _dear_ friend will no
longer mingle with us in the social or domestic circle,--will not again
lead regiment or brigade of fearless braves in the thickest and hottest
of the fight, inspiring to feats of exalted heroism--his brave and
generous heart now cold and lifeless--dim and sightless those eyes
whose radiant and enlivening orbs beamed, now with kindness, and now
with fiery bravery--his intercourse with the living world, brought to a
final period,--let us remember, that although Colonel Creighton is
gone, yet he is not lost; he is not lost to his country, for it has his
noble example of true bravery and practical patriotism.

"'He is not lost to us who knew him, for he lives, and will ever live,
templed in our brightest memories and best affections. Nor can he be
lost to history, for he has made the offering which places his name on
its brightest page.

"'Death never comes alone, but is always attended by an escort of
sadness. Whenever the silver cord is loosed, the golden bowl broken,
the pitcher broken at the fountain, the wheel broken at the cistern,
and dust returns to the earth, as it was, mourners go about the
streets. But it is especially sad, when, as in this case, sister,
mother, and wife are denied the sorrowful pleasure of being present,
and ministering to the wants of the dying, and speaking words of
Christian hope. But even this finds an offset in the fact that it was
his honored privilege to die for country--to fall, covered with glory!
Also, in the fact that his body was not mangled--that he did not suffer
long--in the assurance furnished by the words, 'Oh, my dear wife!'
uttered in dying accents after he fell, and before he expired, that his
last thoughts were of home and kindred; and may not we hope that these
words were breathed in prayer, and that he threw his whole soul
helpless, but trustfully, upon the merits of the Saviour? Again, it is
a source of great gratification to us all, and especially to the
relatives, that he does not fill a distant and unknown grave--that he
was tenderly borne from the field, and promptly forwarded for honorable
interment. His grave is to be in our midst, marked by a marble shaft,
which will scarcely crumble beneath the tread of the coming ages. You
can go there and pay the mournful tribute which nature and affection
prompt. And may it not be believed, that from their patriotic ashes
(for Creighton and Crane fought and fell together, and they are to rest
side by side)--is it not to be believed, that from their patriotic
ashes will spring a rich harvest _in kind_ to at once avenge their
fall, and save our imperilled country? And will not fathers and mothers
conduct their children to these honored graves, and there put upon them
vows of eternal hostility to treason and to traitors, be they secret or
armed, even as Hamilcar caused his son Hannibal to swear, at the altar,
eternal hatred to Rome? And will not every one who visits their tombs,
and reads their epitaphs, whisper, "Peace and honor." And when this
cruel war is over, and the God of our fathers shall crown our labors
and sufferings with success, and bestow upon us, as a nation, an
honorable, righteous, and perpetual peace, then, amid the light, and
songs, and joy of the nation's jubilee, let their epitaphs be written
anew. And during all ages, peace to their ashes, peace to their memory,
and peace to their heroic spirits.

"'Let us this day, around the lifeless forms of these fallen heroes,
not profanely, but solemnly and religiously, swear that the lives of
these, together with the lives of hundreds of thousands of the flower
of the nation, given for the salvation of the country, shall not be
given in vain; that we will complete well, what they have so well
begun.

"'I need not ask of you, in behalf of the aged mother and bereaved
widow of Colonel Creighton, your warm, your practical, your continued
sympathies: these, I am sure, will not be withheld. But I now ask you
to join me in one fervent prayer to the God of the aged, the
fatherless, and the widow, our fathers' God, and the God of battles,
that He will, by His almighty arm, sustain, and, by His abundant grace,
comfort the aged mothers, and bereaved widows, and afflicted friends of
our brave soldiers, and their departed sons, husbands, and brothers;
that He will thus sustain and comfort all whose hearts have been cloven
by the battle-axe of war; that He will abundantly shield, help, bless,
and comfort our brave soldiers upon the field, in the hospitals, and
prisoners in the hands of our enemies; and that He will speedily bestow
upon our imperilled country the inestimable blessing of an honorable,
righteous, and lasting peace. Amen.'

"Rev. C. C. Foot, at the request of the family of the late
Lieutenant-Colonel Crane, made the following address:

"'The duties we are called to perform--the bearing of our dead brave to
their final rest--is indeed solemn and sad. That those who admired and
loved them in life, and delight to honor them when dead, should, with
sympathizing hearts and grateful hands, minister such a funeral
ovation, is due to them in view of the sacrifice they made, the toils
they endured, and their deeds of patriotism and valor. When the bugle
was first sounded in Washington, calling the North to the defence of
our institutions, these were among the first to respond; leaving their
business, their friends, and their families, for the field of strife,
they unsheathed their swords to strike for freedom's sacred cause. In
many skirmishes, and in every battle of their brigade, they struck with
such bravery and success as to have secured perpetual illustriousness;
while ever a nation exists to feel the throb of a nation's heart, while
a man lives to read the annals of America, their noble deeds shall be
known, and their illustrious names shall be honored.

"'They passed through so many dangers almost unscarred, that they
feared no ill, and their families began to expect with confidence their
return to the enjoyments of home, ere many months more should have
flown. But when on Ringgold's hillside they raised their swords to
gleam as never before, from a volley of Confederate musketry their
death-warrant came. Their bodies sank to the ground--their spirits
ascended through the smoke-cloud of battle to the patriot's God, to
join the slain of the Seventh Ohio Volunteer Infantry, where the stars
forever shine in original splendor and glory. On the morrow, instead of
the ready pen reporting to loved ones at home that "all is well with
us," the telegraph was put in requisition to announce that never more
should their voices be heard by friend, companion, or offspring. Oh,
how sad such intelligence! How many families, how many tender, loving,
trembling hearts throughout the land, have been made sorrowful by like
intelligence since this war was so cruelly hurled upon us? From what
our soldier friends do and suffer from the myriad untimely deaths,
shall we not learn the magnitude of the work of the army, and our great
indebtedness to all who have gone to fight for us, our homes, and our
country? Let us render them the honor due. When men become illustrious,
it is but natural that their friends review their lives, and that
others inquire who they are, whence they came, and what circumstances
molded them for their greatness. To answer briefly and in part such
inquiries about one of these brave men--Lieutenant-Colonel O. J.
Crane--is the work to which I have been invited. Lieutenant-Colonel
Crane was born in Chautauque County, New York, in the year 1829. When
about three years old, his parents removed to their native State,
Vermont. Soon after this, his father died, and he was left to climb
life's rugged hill from his mother's arms to manhood, without the
invaluable aid of a father's counsels and assistance. He was blest with
a kind, intelligent, and prayerful mother, to whom he owed no small
amount of gratitude.

"'Her care and labor for his health, and even his life, were constant
and great. While quite young, he once received a burn, so severe that
his life was despaired of. The attendant physician said he could not
live--or living, would always be helpless. But his mother loved him
into _life_ and _health_, little thinking that she had saved him from
one fire, only to see him exposed and becoming a victim to a more
galling one; little thinking that to him, for whose life she struggled,
she and the nation would become indebted for liberty and political
security. During his youth he lived chiefly with an uncle, and with
whom, about thirteen years ago, he located in Conneaut, Ohio. While
there, he was employed in mechanical labor. He spent one year on the
Isthmus. On his return from the Isthmus, he came to Cleveland, and
found employment as a ship-carpenter. In this city, and this business,
he remained till called to participate in our national conflict.

"'As a mechanic, he enjoyed the confidence and esteem of his employers
and his fellows. As a man, he drew around him a pleasant circle of
friends, constant and affectionate, who deeply mourn his loss. In
disposition, he was frank, manly, kind, and ever cheerful. He leaves a
sorrowing wife, to whom he was married nine years ago, three small
children, a mother, brothers and sisters. Their bereavement is too
great, their grief too deep, for even them to express in language. Yet
not till weary weeks shall fail to bring letters from the
battle-field--not till months confirm that no husband returns--not till
years reveal the need of a father to guide the orphans, and a companion
to sustain an aching heart, shall be fully realized the magnitude of
the sacrifice made, in laying upon a nation's altar a husband and a
father.

"'The subject of these remarks had never made a public profession of
faith in Jesus. He had respected religion. He showed great kindness and
respect to the chaplain of his regiment, and consequently had a good
chaplain. He also, after entering the service, became interested in
personal religion. He professed a readiness to die when called. Let us
pray and hope that beyond the turmoil of this life, he may receive his
dear ones to everlasting fellowship of joy.

"'Some months ago he became a member of the Masonic fraternity. Though
so soon taken from them, yet--

    "'By the hieroglyphic bright,
      Which none but craftsmen ever saw,
    Strange memory on our minds shall write
      His honored name that's far awa.'

"'Citizens of Cleveland and Ohio, as we embalm his name in our memory,
let us not fail to remember, also, the dear family he has left. Let us
give them our heartfelt sympathy--not the sympathy of _pity_, but
that of _gratitude_--for his and their debtors we are. He gave his
life; not for himself, but for us who live, for our homes, and our
posterity. Surrounding the husbandless with what comforts we can, and
supplying the fatherless with fatherly care, and aid, and sympathy, let
us, to our utmost, discharge our indebtedness. Let us work and pray
that but few more brave need fall; and that the time be speeded when
the defenders of our liberties shall be welcomed home to the enjoyment
of their triumphs, with the jubilant acclamation of many millions of
freemen.'

"Professor H. E. Peck, at the request of the General Committee,
delivered the address on behalf of the city, as follows:

"'On a fair Sabbath in May, only three short seasons ago, just as the
bells were calling the town to worship, a regiment passed down yonder
street. That, citizens, was a spectacle which you who saw it will never
forget. Not because the marching column was striking to the eye. There
was no pageant. There were no arms, no banners. There was not even a
uniform. The farmer, the student, and the smith, were in that line;
and the farmer marched in the garments he brought from the furrow,
and the student and the smith were attired as they had been in the
recitation-room and shop. But for all that, the display was profoundly
impressive. Here was the flower of the Reserve. Lake, Mahoning,
Trumbull, Lorain, and Erie, each had a hundred; Portage, twice a
hundred; and Cuyahoga, thrice a hundred in the line. And each hundred
was made up, not of the rabble, but of sons, whom worthy fathers and
mothers dearly loved; of men, who, if they should stay at home, would
soon be conspicuous for wealth, or learning, or skill in useful arts.
And these thousand true men, loved well at home, made of sterling
stuff, were on their way to _war_--to actual war. To serve the
imperilled country, they had quit all,--farms, shops, books, friends,
hopes, the past, the future,--all but duty and honor. They might never
return. The vow on them might take them to bloody fields, from which
there should be no passage except down through the gates of death. Oh,
kinsman, was not that an impressive scene? Did you ever see the like?
Did not tears wet your eyes as you looked on? Were not the cheers with
which you sent the heroes on their way divided, as shouts of yours had
never before been, nor have been since, between admiration and sorrow?

"'This, friends, was the first march of our gallant Seventh. You do not
forget that in that march the column was led by a young captain, whose
high carriage and soldierly bearing were almost the only signs of real
military display. The body of that young captain lies in one of yonder
coffins. Of him, and his brave comrade who sleeps beside him, I am to
speak on this occasion. The history of the noble Seventh is _their_
late history. With it, therefore, let me begin.

"'The Seventh left Cleveland May 5, 1861. It went hence to Camp
Dennison, where E. B. Tyler, of Ravenna; W. R. Creighton, of Cleveland;
and John S. Casement, of Painesville, were made its first
field-officers. In the June following, while it was still at Camp
Dennison, the regiment was reorganized and sworn into the three-years'
service. I well remember seeing Captain Crane, whose remains are
yonder, on a sweet Sabbath afternoon--men, sun, air, and earth, all
were glad, and the harmonies of nature were tunefully praising
God--bringing his company to the colonel's quarters to be sworn in. I
well remember the impression which the strong voice of the sombre
captain made upon me, as, after the young soldiers, with bare heads and
uplifted hands, had taken the oath, he cried, "Company, right face;
forward, march!" The tone of the command was as if he would say, "Now,
men, there is no retreat. Only service, perhaps death, is before you."

"'A week later, General McClellan, who had then just taken command of
the Western Department, came looking for the right material with which
to begin his Western Virginia campaign, and inspected the regiment. But
it was not at garments the shrewd leader looked. It was the _person_ he
studied. He sought the eye. He narrowly scanned the look. Down the line
and back again he slowly went. I saw the expression on his face, as at
the end, he seemed to say to himself, "_They are the right sort!_" In
the reorganization of the regiment, the staff remained as it was
before.

"'On the 26th of June, 1861, the Seventh left Camp Dennison, to enter
on active service in Western Virginia. With many long marches it sought
the foe. It had begun to doubt whether it would ever meet him, when, at
Cross Lanes, on the 26th of August, he came, with overwhelming force.
For a brief space, the companies, separated from each other, held their
ground. Then, from bare and irresistible necessity, they gave way.
Twenty-four gallant men were left on the field, dead or wounded. One
hundred were carried away prisoners, and the remainder were scattered
like partridges which have received the sportsman's fire. At first,
tidings came to us that the Seventh was wholly destroyed. How ached our
hearts! Presently, better news came. Major Casement had brought four
hundred men through the wilderness into Charleston, and Captain Crane
had come to Gauley, bringing, not only almost his entire company, but a
flag which he had captured from the enemy.

"'Then came to the regiment days of distraction and despondency. You,
and others of the Reserve, heard of, and agonized over its condition.
To encourage and cheer it, you sent it a stand of beautiful colors. At
the Academy of Music, as you will remember, before a throng of your
best citizens, the standards were dedicated.

"'On a mountain-side, in Western Virginia, with Rosecrans' army lying
miles up and down, and with the smoke of the enemy's camp-fires rising
in the distance, they were presented to the regiment. I wish I could
picture the scene, the splendors of the magnificent landscape, the
exquisite beauty of the colors as they proudly glowed in the clear
sunlight, the enthusiasm of the men and the pride of the officers. Your
present helped to rouse the spirit of the regiment. The words of love
and considerate regard, which you sent with the gift, assured it that
its honor was not yet lost. How thrilling, how hopeful, was the cheer
which rolled off among the hills, as the color-guard took its trust!

"'From the Kanawha the Seventh went, on the 17th of December, 1861, to
the Potomac. There, now led by Lieutenant Colonel Creighton--Colonel
Tyler having taken temporary command of a brigade--it met, at
Winchester, March 23, 1862, Jackson's celebrated "Stonewall Legion."
Hot was the fire, when the Northern iron met the Southern flint. The
Seventh left fifty-six dead and wounded on the field. But it won a
name in the fight. The story told of them, the land over, was, _they
fought like veterans_. Then came the long chase up the Shenandoah,
then the hard march across to Eastern Virginia, and back to the gates
of the Shenandoah. Then came Port Republic, the first square stand-up
fight which the regiment had, when, led by Creighton, in an open field,
in a line trim enough for a dress parade, and with "Cross Lanes" for
its battle-cry, the glorious Seventh charged down on Jackson's
steadfast front. Ah, how the list of the dead and wounded was again
fearfully swelled! Seventy-two names were added to it.

"'By this time the regiment had become so reduced by the casualties of
war, that its friends on the Reserve asked that it might be sent home
to recruit. "No," promptly replied discriminating Halleck, "not so long
as there is a lame drummer left; not if you will send us a whole new
regiment in place of this handful. We know these men, they are just
such as we want." Colonel Tyler's promotion to a brigadiership brought
Lieutenant-Colonel Creighton to the head of the regiment, and this, and
other changes, presently made Captain Crane a Lieutenant-Colonel. The
regiment now had plenty of duty. It fought at Cedar Mountain, and
there, on the extreme advance, it met the brunt of danger.

"'In one company, out of twenty-one men engaged, eighteen fell killed
or wounded. The whole regiment suffered in hardly less proportion. One
hundred and ninety-six, of the two hundred and ninety-seven heroes
engaged, fell. There, fiery Creighton, as usual, not content to be
elsewhere than on the extreme front, was so severely wounded that he
was compelled to come home to recover.

"'Soon the regiment was at Antietam, and there it shared the toils and
honors of that honorable field. Thirty-eight fallen men, out of one
hundred engaged, was the price it paid for its opportunity. Presently
it fought and prevailed against great odds at Dumfries. Here it lost
ten more of its scant few.

"'In the next year's campaign, after lying in camp and being
considerably recruited, the regiment was at Chancellorsville. There it
did good service, by catching and holding on its steady line droves of
fugitives, who were ingloriously seeking the rear, and by covering the
retreat of its corps. It lost, at Chancellorsville, ninety-nine men.
Next the regiment was at Gettysburg. There, for the first time in its
history, it fought behind defences; nor could Ewell, surging with fiery
valor up against the rocky rampart, break the line which it, and its
compeers of the Twelfth Corps, held. The Seventh lost at Gettysburg
nineteen men; and, as from every field before, so from this, it brought
honor and a new name. From the Potomac the regiment went, in September
last, to the Tennessee. There, on the 24th of last month, it shared in
that brilliant "battle above the clouds," by which Hooker cleared
Lookout Mountain. Decisive as the result of its courage here was, it
seems to have left behind but one wounded man as its share of the
sacrifice which the victory cost. Then came the pursuit of Bragg, and
the overtaking of his rear-guard at Ringgold; then the climbing, by the
Twelfth Corps, of that bare hill, on the top of which the enemy was
securely posted. Staunch Creighton was in command of a brigade, and
Crane led the Seventh. The charge was a desperate one, but Creighton
did not falter. Kindling to that ardor of which he was so susceptible,
he urged his command on. "Boys," he said, "we are ordered to take that
hill. I want to see you walk right up it." Then putting himself, not in
the rear, as being temporarily a brigadier he might have done, but far
in the advance, he led the way. And Crane, close behind, stoutly held
the Seventh to its bloody work. The men were ready for the task. The
zeal of Cross Lanes, of Winchester, of Port Republic, burned to a white
heat. The gallant Seventh, leading the column, flung itself into the
billows of fire, as if it were rescuing home from robber hands. But,
ah! chivalric Creighton fell, and, alas! sturdy Crane, too; and of the
commissioned officers of the Seventh, but one remained unhurt. Is it
wonderful that the grand old regiment, losing the inspiring command of
the brave soldiers whose voices had so often aroused its purposes, fell
back? Oh, Creighton and Crane, had you lived, the Seventh would,
perhaps, without help, have carried the dear old colors, tattered by so
many leaden storms, into the enemy's defiant works! Sad tale that I
must tell, of the two hundred and ten sons and brothers of ours who
went into the fight, ninety fell; of the fourteen commissioned officers
on the field, thirteen were killed or wounded.

"'My story of the Seventh is done. Yes, the Sabbath comes; sweet, clear
day, as bright as that holy morn on which the Seventh first went its
way. A sad cortege passes up the same street yonder. Music wails at its
head. A downcast guard of honor marches, with mourning colors, behind
hearses trimmed with the badges of woe. Look you, kindred, the band
which follows the dead is made up of the men who marched in that May
Sabbath line two years ago. But the farmer, the student, the smith,
are not there. These are soldiers all. They are scarred with the marks
of Cross Lanes, of Winchester--nay, let me not stop to recite the long
list of battles through which they have passed. Yes, here is part of
the scant few left out of the eighteen hundred staunch men who have
stood under the flag of the Seventh; and here, hearse-borne, are the
bodies of the good leaders who shall head the regiment no more. Pause
now, citizens, while I tell you about these noble men. Colonel
Creighton was born in Pittsburgh. He was but twenty-six years of age
when he fell. For several years he followed the trade of a printer in
this city. But he was born to be a soldier, and years ago he learned,
in civic schools, a soldier's trade. So, when the war broke out, he was
fit to take command. He raised a company in this city. At once his
military talent was revealed. He had not a peer in the camp as a
drill-master, and there was something about his ardent nature which
made men feel that he was fit to command. Thus superior office came to
him--he did not seek it. But getting it, he discharged his duties well.
He was affectionate to his men, erring only in being, perhaps, too free
with them. And when battle came, he was a master-spirit in the dreadful
storm. Burning with enthusiasm, almost rash with courage, he could
inspire his "gamecocks"--as he familiarly called his men--with such
qualities as are most needed in the charge and in the deadly breach. I
have often asked sound thinking members of the Seventh, "What of
Creighton?" The answer has always been, "_He is a soldier, every
inch._"

"'Lieutenant-Colonel Crane was born in Troy, New York, in the year
1828. He, too, has been a mechanic here for many years. Like his chief,
he, too, had learned the use of arms before the war commenced. He was,
therefore, amply qualified to take command of his company when Captain
Creighton was promoted. And no ordinary disciplinarian was Captain
Crane. He had a difficult company, but it was with a strong hand that
he laid hold of his work. Headstrong men had a master in him. Withal,
he was the soul of kindness to those he commanded. His rugged nature,
despising military finery, and the pomps and forms of military life,
came down at once to plain, blunt, frank, but sincere and hearty
intercourse with the men under him. If you wished to find Captain
Crane, you must look for him where his boys were; and if his boys had
had a trying or toilsome work, you might be sure he was lightening the
load by his own example of brave and sturdy patience. He did not have
an impulsive nature. He was not a thunderbolt on the field. He was
rock, rather. Fiery floods might break against him, and yet he was
always the same; always imperturbable, honest, strong.

"'I should have said before, that Colonel Creighton was in every battle
which the Seventh ever fought, except Antietam. It is in place for me
to say here, that Lieutenant-Colonel Crane took part in every battle in
which his regiment shared. I doubt if another instance of the kind is
on record. Would that the Hand which had so often averted danger, could
have turned the fatal bullets aside at Ringgold!

"'And now, friends, I am, at the invitation of the joint-committee of
the city council, the military, the Typographical Union, the
ship-carpenters, and yourselves, and as the representative of other
towns, who helped raise the Seventh, to bring a tribute of gratitude
and praise to the memory of the gallant dead. In my poor way, I here
certify to the noble qualities, to the brave deeds of the soldiers
coffined yonder. I come to say, that the honor done them by the city,
by the military, by yourselves, by good men who, in other towns, mourn
their loss, is well bestowed. The heroes have earned their honors. They
have bought them with such high conduct, with such self-sacrifices, as
the brightest laurels poorly reward. I know not how those souls, which
lately inhabited yonder clay, stand in the other world (would that your
prayers and mine could reach them), but I do know, that their names
shall live in this world forever. The marble you shall put up over
their dust will itself have gone to dust before their renown shall have
passed from the hearts and lips of men.

"'Would, friends, that you and I, by any ministry of love, could
staunch these widows' and half-orphans' tears. Oh! sisters bereaved,
and dear little children, now fatherless, may God in His mercy keep
you! May He be help and hope to you! Remember, I pray you, that the
spilled blood which was so dear to you, was precious also to God; that
it is from such seed that He makes freedom, peace, social order, and
prosperity to grow.

"'And, citizens, what shall I say of the Seventh, which mourns its
noble dead? Shall I summon here the spirits of those who have fallen on
the half-score fields, where the staunch old regiment has left its
dead? Shall I call from the shadowy world those who have died in
festering prisons? Shall I order the rally for those who, broken in
body, shall engage in active pursuits no more? Shall I bring from the
field the little remnant--headed by the one unhurt commissioned
officer, and under this dear, chafed, and rent old flag, which no
longer shines with the glory of color and figure which it displayed
when first unfurled in your Academy of Music, but which is lustrous
with the light with which brave deeds have invested it--shall I tell
them of your love for, and your gratitude to them? Nay, this I cannot
do. But I can say to these representatives of the regiment who are with
us, and through them to that little handful of bronzed veterans who,
huddling around a single camp-fire at Chattanooga, are the last remnant
of the Seventh--to you, honored men, we owe a debt we can never
discharge. You sprang to arms, when others hesitated. You entered the
flinty paths of war with feet shod only for the gentle ways of peace.
Often have you been tried, never have you failed; and the honor of the
Reserve, which we committed to you, has been proudly kept on every
field. And in this hour of weighty bereavement, our feelings towards
you and your comrades, living and dead, is like that of the pious
Scotch woman who, when grim Claverhouse having first shot her husband,
laughing, asked, "Well, woman, what thinkest thou of thy good man now?"
quietly replied, as she drew the pierced head to her bosom, and wiped
the death-damp from his brow: "I aye thought much of him, but now more
than ever."

"'Now, bearers, take out your dead. Put the cherished remains in an
honored place. Tell art to lift above them worthy marble. Write upon
the stone the names of the battles in which our heroes have fought.
Write also the virtues of the dead. Write, too, that gratitude has
lifted the monument, partly to do honor to them, worthy of it, whom
human praise can never reach; and to teach the living that it is well
to make even life a sacrifice to duty. And when our war has been ended,
when peace and freedom shall be in all our borders, thronging feet
shall, through all the generations, come up to your memorial, and learn
lessons of heroism and self-sacrifice.'

"Rev. William Goodrich, of the First Presbyterian Church, made the
closing prayer; after which the choir chanted impressively the
following hymn:

    "'With tearful eyes I look around,
      Life seems a dark and gloomy sea;
    Yet midst the gloom I hear a sound,
      A heavenly whisper, 'Come to Me.'

    "'It tells me of a place of rest--
      It tells me where my soul may flee;
    Oh! to the weary, faint, oppressed,
      How sweet the bidding, 'Come to Me!'

    "'When nature shudders, loth to part
      From all I love, enjoy, and see,
    When a faint chill steals o'er thy heart,
      A sweet voice utters, 'Come to Me.'

    "'Come, for all else must fade and die,
      Earth is no resting place for thee;
    Heavenward direct thy weeping eye,
      I am thy portion, 'Come to Me.'

    "'Oh, voice of mercy! voice of love!
      In conflict, grief, and agony;
    Support me, cheer me from above!
      And gently whisper, Come to Me.'

"This closed the exercises at the church.


THE FUNERAL PROCESSION.

"As soon as the exercises in the church closed, the Brooklyn Light
Artillery commenced firing minute-guns from the field-piece planted on
the square in front of the church. At the same time, the chimes of
Trinity rang a muffled peal, and the bells in all the other churches
commenced tolling. The square and the streets leading to it were packed
with people from the city and surrounding country, the latter having
been pouring in all the morning. It seemed almost impossible to keep an
open space in so great a crowd, but the admirable management of the
marshals of the day and the city police, aided by the spirit of order
and decorum in the crowd, succeeded in preventing any trouble or
confusion.

"The procession was formed in nearly the order as at first arranged.
First came Leland's band, playing the "Dead March." Then the
Twenty-ninth Regiment, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Frazee, with
arms reversed and bound with crape. Next the discharged officers and
soldiers of the Seventh, headed by their old band. These old members of
the regiment numbered sixty, and were formed into a company, under
Captain Molyneaux. They were followed by the clergymen of the city,
after which came the bodies.

"Colonel Creighton's body was in a hearse drawn by four white horses,
from undertaker Duty; and the body of Lieutenant-Colonel Crane, in a
hearse drawn by four black horses, from undertaker Howland. Behind the
hearses were led two horses fully caparisoned. The pall-bearers, whose
names have been previously given, walked beside the hearses. Eleven
carriages, containing the mourners, came next, followed by a carriage
containing Lieutenant Loomis, Sergeant-Major Tisdel, Bugler Welzel, and
privates Shepherd and Meigs, forming the escort from the Seventh. Next
were the members of the old Cleveland Light Guard, with their badges
and flags; Governor Brough and other invited guests, committee of
arrangements, city council, city officers, county military committee,
two hundred sick and wounded soldiers from the United States Military
Hospital, soldiers from the Twelfth Cavalry, Brooklyn Light Artillery,
Captain Pelton; other military and officers of the United States
regular and volunteer services; United States Court officers,
Typographical Union, ship-carpenters, old Light Guard, under Captain J.
Robinson, students from Commercial College, County Court officers,
citizens on foot, citizens in carriages.

"The procession was of great length, and passed through a dense crowd
of thousands of people during the whole way. It was well managed by
Colonel William H. Hayward, chief marshal of the day, and his
assistants, H. M. Chapin, William Edwards, John M. Sterling, junior,
and C. Busch. The police were again of incalculable value in clearing
the way and keeping perfect order.


AT THE TOMB.

"The lot in the Woodland Cemetery, intended as the final resting-place
of the heroic dead, not having yet been selected, the bodies were taken
to the City Cemetery, and deposited temporarily in the Bradburn Vault,
the use of which had been generously tendered. The police again, ever
vigilant and effective, had kept the cemetery and its approaches free
from the vast crowd until the procession had entered, and then secured
ample room, so that there was no crowding or confusion.

"The Twenty-ninth Regiment was drawn up in line, with colors
immediately opposite the tomb. The company of the old members of the
Seventh, with reversed arms, stood at the right of the tomb.

"As the procession moved up to the tomb the band played a dirge. The
Rev. W. A. Fiske, rector of Grace Church, read the beautiful and
impressive burial-service of the Episcopal Church, the bodies were
placed in the vault, the final prayer said, and then the door of the
tomb was closed. The old members of the Seventh fired three volleys
over the tomb, and all was over. The heroic dead sleep undisturbed.

"So ended the grandest and the most mournful pageant that has passed
through the streets of Cleveland for many a year."


LIEUT.-COL. MERVIN CLARK.

On a gloomy night in May, 1861, when the wind was howling in fitful
gusts, and the rain pouring down in merciless rapidity, the writer was
awakened by the stentorian voice of the adjutant in front of the tent,
followed by an order that Lieutenant ---- would report for guard-duty.
After wading half-knee deep in mud and water, narrowly escaping a cold
bath in an over-friendly ditch, I arrived at the headquarters of the
guard. Soon after my arrival, a boy reported to me for duty, as
sergeant of the guard; a position no less responsible than my own. At
first I felt that, on such a fearful night, I needed more than a boy to
assist me in the performance of my task. His form was fragile; his face
was smooth as that of a girl, and in the dim, shadowy light of a
camp-fire, struggling against the heavy rain, I took him to be about
fifteen years of age. We immediately entered into conversation, and
between admiration and surprise, the rain was forgotten, and the
moments sped so rapidly, that it was nearing the time to change the
guard. But my boy companion had forgotten nothing, and as the moment
arrived, he called in the relief. As he moved among those sturdy
warriors, it occurred to me that I had never before met a boy, who was
at the same time a man--a brave, prudent, reliable man. All night he
did his duty, and when we parted in the morning, I both loved and
admired him. This was my first meeting with Colonel Clark.

Mervin Clark was a native of Ohio, having been born in the city of
Cleveland, in 1843. When but three years of age his mother died, and at
the age of nine his surviving parent, leaving him an orphan. He was now
taken, into the family of Henry W. Clark, an uncle, where he found a
home, and kind friends, during the remainder of his life.

The flash of the last gun at Sumter had hardly died away, when he
enrolled himself as a private in Captain De Villiers' company, at the
same time declaring that he would, by no act of his, leave the service
of his country, until rebels in arms were met and subdued. How well he
kept that pledge, it is the office of this brief sketch to show.

He left Camp Dennison as an orderly-sergeant, and during the trying
marches and skirmishes in Western Virginia, won a commission. Arriving
in the East, he was made a first-lieutenant. At the battle of
Winchester, he surprised and delighted every one who saw him. When the
bullets flew thickest, he stepped on to the brink of the hill, over
which our men were firing, and, with revolver in hand, took part in the
strife. His captain, seeing his danger, directed him to get behind a
tree which stood close by. He obeyed orders, but with his back to the
tree, and his face to the foe. At the battle of Cedar Mountain, he
commanded a company, and during that fearful day, led his men with
great bravery. At last, when the order was given to retreat, he mistook
it for an order to charge, and, with a dozen men, dashed at the double
line of a whole brigade of rebels. It was not until an officer of
authority conveyed the true order to him, that he would withdraw. He
now took part in all the battles in which his regiment was engaged in
the East, except Antietam. When the regiment left for the West, he
accompanied it, and soon after took part in the battles of Lookout
Mountain, Mission Ridge, Taylor's Ridge, and the series of engagements
taking place while with Sherman. Before his term of service expired, he
was made a captain, and commanded his company on its homeward march. He
was soon after mustered out with his company. He now sought quiet and
rest at his home, giving no evidence of an intention to again enter the
service. But before he had been at home many weeks, he surprised and
disappointed his friends by enlisting as a private in the regular army.
His fame, however, was too wide-spread in Ohio to suffer him to
re-enter the service as a private. Governor Brough had already selected
him for promotion, and when learning of his enlistment in the regular
service, procured an order for his discharge, and immediately appointed
him lieutenant-colonel of the One Hundred and Eighty-third Regiment,
then about to enter the field. He had now come of age, November 5th,
and on the 8th of November cast his first vote; on the 12th, he
received his commission; and on the 15th, he left for the front. His
regiment joined the army of General Thomas, on its retreat before the
rebel forces under Hood. On the 30th of November, the regiment was
engaged in the terrible battle of Franklin. During the engagement, the
regiment was ordered to charge the enemy's works. The color bearer was
soon shot down, when Clark seized the colors, and calling to his men,
"Who will follow me to retake these works?" mounted the rebel works,
and immediately fell, a minie ball having passed through his head.
Every effort was made to take his body from the field, but to no
purpose, and the "boy officer" was wrapped in his blanket, and buried
on the field of his fame, to be finally removed by careful hands, when
the earth had covered every vestige of the strife in its friendly
bosom.


LIEUTENANT HENRY ROBINSON.

Henry Robinson was a native of Ohio, and entered the service as
first-lieutenant of Company G. He was always attentive to his duties,
and soon took a position among the first of his rank. He was constantly
with his command during its early service. He was in the skirmish at
Cross Lanes, where he won the respect and confidence of the entire
command by his gallant conduct. In this affair, he commanded Company G.
Arriving at Charleston, he was sent to Gauley Bridge, and soon after
was taken violently sick with a fever. He soon after died.

In the death of Lieutenant Robinson, the regiment made one of its
greatest sacrifices. He was esteemed by every one for his kind and
courteous manners, as well as for his ability as a soldier. He had many
friends in the army, and at home, and I doubt very much if he had an
enemy in the world. His military career was short, but of such a
character that his friends can refer to it with pride.


LIEUTENANT E. S. QUAY.

E. S. Quay entered the service as second-lieutenant of Company G. He
was with the regiment at Cross Lanes, where he gave promise of much
future usefulness as a soldier. He accompanied the regiment to Eastern
Virginia, where he was acting assistant adjutant-general to Colonel
Tyler. He took part in the battle of Winchester, where he did splendid
service. After Tyler's promotion to a general, he was made
adjutant-general, and assigned to his staff. In this capacity, he
served in the battle of Port Republic, where he gained new laurels. He
finally went to his home on account of ill-health, and after a time,
died of consumption. He was a good soldier.


LIEUTENANT JAMES P. BRISBINE.

James P. Brisbine was a native of Trumbull County, Ohio. He was born in
1836. His parents dying while he was quite young, he went to live with
an uncle by the name of Applegate. He received a fair education, and
during the time, in part, maintaining himself by teaching school in
winter. In the spring of 1860, he commenced reading law in Warren,
Ohio, which he continued until the breaking out of the rebellion.
During his course of study, he gave promise of an able and useful
lawyer. When it became evident that the rebellion could not be
suppressed but by the force of arms, he deemed it his duty to leave the
study of the profession of his choice, and enroll himself among the
defenders of his country. This step he considered as a decided
sacrifice to him; for, by nature, he was in no way inclined to the life
of a soldier; he preferred the quiet life of a citizen, which is alone
to be found at home. It was with many misgivings that he finally placed
his name on the roll. In doing this, he was alone influenced by
patriotic motives. When urged to be a candidate for the position of
sergeant, he declined to have any thing to do with the matter; but was
elected, notwithstanding his indifference.

At Camp Dennison, he was made orderly-sergeant. He took part in the
skirmish at Cross Lanes, where he made a good record as a soldier. Soon
after entering the field, his health failed him. The long marches often
taxed him beyond his strength; but he seldom complained. He was not in
the battle of Winchester on account of sickness, being disabled from
the effects of the severe march from Strasburg, which took place a
short time before. He expressed many regrets on account of his absence.
But he very soon had an opportunity to test his courage on the
battle-field. The engagement of Port Republic occurred shortly after.
He was in no respect second in gallantry to those who were in the
previous battle. He was ever at his post, doing his duty. During the
latter part of the battle, a captain, an intimate friend, fell,
severely wounded. He caught him in his arms, and laid him gently on the
ground, pillowing his head in his lap. The regiment moved off, and the
rebels advanced; but he refused to leave his friend. And he did not
leave until the captain was borne away by his comrades. He passed
through this battle without a scratch. He accompanied the regiment to
Alexandria, and from there to the front of Pope's army. He now took
part in the battle of Cedar Mountain. While cheering his men forward,
he was wounded. Two men took him in their arms, and started in search
of the hospital; but before they were off the field a bullet struck him
in the groin, severing the femoral artery. Said he, "Remember, boys, I
die for my country," and expired in their arms. Thus, a true and
devoted friend of his country died to preserve it from the attacks of
those who had been educated and supported by it from boyhood.

As an officer, Lieutenant Brisbine was much esteemed; as a companion,
he was admired by every one. I doubt if he had an enemy in the army or
at home. He won his promotion in the field; and it was, therefore, a
much greater prize than a higher rank conferred by favor. He was
commissioned early in 1862.


LIEUTENANT CHARLES A. BROOKS.

The subject of this sketch was born in Bristol, Trumbull County, in the
year 1843. He early developed those good qualities of head and heart
for which he was afterwards so distinguished. Being a good student,
attentive to his books, as he was to every other good purpose, he
acquired a good education, which would have enabled him to engage in
any occupation with credit to himself and profit to the community.

He was desirous of entering the service when the war first began, but
was held back by domestic ties which bound him strongly to home. But on
the second call for troops, he could no longer remain out of the army;
and, hastening to a recruiting station, he enlisted in Company H, of
the Seventh Regiment. He arrived at Camp Dennison on the 30th of May,
and, with others, was mustered into the service. His tall, commanding
figure, connected with his sterling qualities of mind, pointed him out
as a proper person for promotion. He was, therefore made a corporal,
and, as soon as a vacancy occurred, a sergeant. His officers soon put
unlimited confidence in him. If a hazardous enterprise was to be
performed, he was deemed fitting to undertake it. While still a
sergeant, Creighton would often point him out as his future adjutant.
Finally, when Adjutant Shepherd was compelled to resign, on account of
growing ill health, Creighton procured his appointment as
first-lieutenant, and at once detailed him as his adjutant. He came to
this position entirely qualified; for, from the time he had been made
orderly of Company H, he transacted all of the business of the company.
He was in the affair at Cross Lanes, and all other skirmishes in which
the regiment was engaged, as well as the following battles: Port
Republic, Cedar Mountain, Dumfries, Chancellorsville, and Gettysburg.

Near the close of the battle of Port Republic, he saw one of his old
officers lying, seriously wounded, so near the enemy's lines as to be
in danger of capture. Throwing down his gun, in company with Charles
Garrard, he braved the battle-fire, and brought his old comrade safely
from the field; thus, probably, saving his life.

At the battle of Cedar Mountain he was slightly wounded, losing a
finger.

In July he was sent to Ohio to bring forward the drafted men assigned
to the Seventh. While on his way from Columbus to his home in Bristol,
he met with a frightful accident resulting in death. While seated in an
omnibus, it was driven on to the railroad track, directly in front of a
train. In jumping out, he was knocked down by the cars and run over,
mangling both legs frightfully. He was taken to the New England House,
but nothing could be done for him, and he expired early the following
morning. The following is from the pen of one who knew him and prized
him:[6]

          [6] Colonel J. F. Asper.

"The career of this young man has been short but brilliant. He has been
a soldier and a man; pure, noble-hearted, sympathetic, and always ready
for any duty. He has been brave, courageous, and trustworthy. He has
gone from us with no stain upon his honor, no spots upon his
escutcheon, but with his armor begrimed with the dust of many battles.
Although young in years, he had lived long, if you count the hardships
he had endured, the stirring and momentous events through which he had
passed, and in the transpiring of which he had been an actor, the
service he rendered his country, and humanity at large, and the good he
had done; if gauged by this standard, he had become more mature than
many men who have attained their threescore and ten years. So bright
an example cannot fail to have a good influence upon the young men of
the country. His violent death will bring his virtues prominently
before their minds, and cannot fail to make an impression. Let all be
exhorted to emulate his patriotism, his gallantry, his valor, his
promptness in the discharge of duty, his kindness of heart, suavity of
manner, his manly and soldier-like qualities; and if in civil life,
they will become manlier men--if in military life, they cannot fail to
become better and braver soldiers."

He was buried near where he was born, on the banks of a rippling brook,
under the shade of beautiful trees, through the boughs of which will
sing an everlasting requiem fitting so brave and active a spirit. The
citizens of the vicinity turned out in mass to honor his memory with
their presence, and tearful eyes and expressive looks showed their
heartfelt sympathy for the afflicted mother, sister, brother, and
relatives; while a military organization from Warren gave him the
fitting escort, and fired three volleys over his grave.

A grateful public will not forget this heroic and noble sacrifice. Let
an enduring monument be erected. Not of marble, which may crumble; but
let his manly deeds be engraved upon the tablets of their memory, and
let his virtues and sacrifices be interwoven with the affections, the
sympathies, and the lives of the people, so that while time lasts, and
all that is noble in human action, good in thought, and true in
conception and motive, shall be treasured as sacred memories, this hero
will not be forgotten, because kept fresh with the watering of many
tears.


LIEUTENANT JOSEPH H. ROSS.

Joseph H. Ross entered the service as a private in Captain W. R.
Sterling's company. Soon after arriving in camp he was made a sergeant,
and finally orderly. He was engaged in all the marches and skirmishes
in Western Virginia, and at Cross Lanes fought like a veteran. He was
in the battle of Winchester, where he displayed such reckless bravery
as to attract the attention of the entire command. While the regiment
was partially concealed behind a ridge, within eighty yards of the
enemy, Ross was not content with remaining at such a distance, but
creeping over the hill, crawled forward on his hands and knees till he
was midway between the lines, and taking a position behind a rock,
swung his hat to those behind. None but Sergeant Whiting, of Company D,
had the courage to follow him. From behind this rock, the two heroes
kept up a constant fire on the enemy, hitting their man at every shot.

Ross was now made a lieutenant, and assigned to Company C. He was in
the battle of Port Republic, where he fought with his usual bravery. At
the battle of Cedar Mountain he commanded Company C. During the entire
day he led his men with such certainty, that they slaughtered the enemy
fearfully. Night came, and he had not received a scratch, while the
thinned ranks testified how many had fallen around him. Soon after
dark, as if the regiment had not already suffered sufficiently, it was
ordered on picket. When about a mile out, it was fired upon from all
quarters, and Lieutenant Ross fell, mortally wounded. He died soon
after. His loss was deeply felt, both in the army and at home; for he
was a true soldier and friend.


LIEUTENANT FRANK JOHNSON.

At this same bloody battle of Cedar Mountain, another youthful hero
fell, Frank Johnson, Company F. He had entered the service as a private
in John Man's company, and had risen through the different grades
of corporal and sergeant to be a lieutenant. He had toiled along
through the hard marches of the Seventh, struggling against a weak
constitution, which was every day being impaired by hardships and
exposure. He had fought nobly in the battles of Winchester and Port
Republic,--recognized by the authorities by giving him a commission;
and now, in the morning of his new life as a _leader_, he fell at the
head of his company.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventh Regiment, by George L. Wood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVENTH REGIMENT ***

***** This file should be named 44783-8.txt or 44783-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/7/8/44783/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
