The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 6. Saturday, December
8, 1849, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 6. Saturday, December 8, 1849
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.
       

Author: Various

Release Date: September 28, 2004 [EBook #13550]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 6. ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.] SATURDAY, DECEMBER 8, 1849 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {81}

CONTENTS

A few Words of Explanation. 81
NOTES:--
  Letter from the Earl of Shaftesbury respecting
    Monmouth's Ash. 82
  Drayton's Poems. 83
  On a Passage in Goldsmith. 83
  Ancient Libraries, by Rev. Dr. Todd. 83
  Defence of a Bald Head, by J. Payne Collier. 84
  Royal Household Allowances. 85
  Adversaria:--Printers' Couplets--Charles Martel. 86
  Bodenham and Ling. 86
  Travelling in England. 87
  Minor Notes:--Ancient Alms Dish--Bishop that
    Burneth--Ironworks in Sussex, &c.--Order of
    Minerva, &c. 87
  Queries Answered:--
    Dorne the Bookseller. 88
    Henno Rusticus. 89
    Myles Blomefylde. 90
  Answers to Minor Queries:--Curse of Scotland--Katherine
    Pegg--Rev. T. Leman--Burnet Prize--Humble Pie, &c. 90

MINOR QUERIES:
  Eva, Daughter, &c.--John de Daundelyon--Genealogy
    of European Sovereigns--Duke of Ashgrove, &c. 92

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c. 94
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted. 95
  Notices to Correspondents. 95
  Advertisements. 95

       *       *       *       *       *

A FEW WORDS OF EXPLANATION.

It was in no boastful or puffing spirit that, when thanking a
correspondent in our last number for "his endeavour to enlarge our
circulation," and requesting all our friends and correspondents "to
follow PHILO'S example by bringing 'NOTES AND QUERIES' under the notice
of such of their friends as take an interest in literary pursuits," we
added "for it is obvious that they will extend the usefulness of our
paper in proportion as they increase its circulation." We wished merely
to state a plain obvious fact. Such must necessarily be the case, and
our experience proves it to be so; for the number of Queries which have
been solved in our columns, has gone on increasing in proportion to the
gradual increase of our circulation;--a result which fully justifies
that passage of our opening address which stated, "that we did not
anticipate any holding back by those whose Notes were most worth
having."

No sooner is information asked for through our medium, than a host of
friendly pens are busied to supply it. From north, south, east, and
west,--from quarters the most unlooked for, do we receive Notes and
Illustrations of every subject which is mooted in our pages. Many of
these replies, too, though subscribed only with an initial or a
pseudonyme, _we_ know to be furnished by scholars who have won the
foremost rank in their respective branches of study. Such men manifest,
by their willingness to afford information to those who need it, and
their readiness to receive it from those who have it to bestow, the
truthfulness of old Chaucer's portrait of the Scholar:--

  "Ful gladly wolde he lerne, and gladly teche."

Nor do our columns exhibit the total result of our labours. Besides the
information communicated to ourselves, some of our friends who inserted
Queries under their own names, have received answers to them without our
intervention.

In addition to those friends who promised us their assistance, we
receive communications from quarters altogether unexpected. Our present
number furnishes a striking instance of this, in the answer to Mr.
Bruce's inquiry respecting the "Monmouth Ash," kindly communicated by
the Earl of Shaftesbury, its distinguished owner.

We trust that each successive paper shows improvement in our
arrangements, and proves also that our means of procuring answers to the
Queries addressed to us are likewise increasing. In the belief that such
is the case, we feel justified in repeating, even at the risk of being
accused of putting in _two_ words for ourselves under the semblance of
_one_ of our readers, "that it is obvious that our friends will extend
the usefulness of our paper in proportion as they increase its
circulation."

       *       *       *       *       * {82}

MONMOUTH'S ASH.

_Letter from the Earl of Shaftesburg accompanying a short "History of
Monmouth Close," formerly printed by his Lordship for the information of
persons visiting that spot._

The whole of Woodlands now belongs to me. The greater part of it was
bought by my late brother soon after he came of age.

I knew nothing of Monmouth Close till the year 1787, when I was shooting
on Horton Heath; the gamekeeper advised me to try for game in the
inclosures called Shag's Heath, and took me to see Monmouth Close and
the famous ash tree there.

I then anxiously inquired of the inhabitants of the neighbouring houses
respecting the traditions concerning Monmouth Close and the celebrated
ash tree, and what I then learnt I have printed for the information of
any person who may visit that spot.

What I have since learnt convinces me that the Duke was not going to
Christchurch. He was on his way to Bournemouth, where he expected to
find a vessel. Monmouth Close is in the direct line from Woodyates to
Bournemouth.

About sixty years ago there was hardly a house there. It was the leading
place of all the smugglers of this neighborhood.

SHAFTESBURY.

St. Giles's House, Nov. 27. 1849.


HISTORY OF MONMOUTH CLOSE.

"The small inclosure which has been known by the name of MONMOUTH CLOSE
ever since the capture of the Duke of Monmouth there, in July, 1685, is
one of a cluster of small inclosures, five in number, which stood in the
middle of Shag's Heath, and were called 'The Island.' They are in the
parish of Woodlands.

"The tradition of the neighbourhood is this: viz. That after the defeat
of the Duke of Monmouth at Sedgemoor, near Bridgewater, he rode,
accompanied by Lord Grey, to Woodyates, where they quitted their horses;
and the Duke having changed clothes with a peasant, endeavoured to make
his way across the country to Christchurch. Being closely pursued, he
made for the Island, and concealed himself in a ditch which was
overgrown with fern and underwood. When his pursuers came up, an old
woman gave information of his being in the Island, and of her having
seen him filling his pocket with peas. The Island was immediately
surrounded by soldiers, who passed the night there, and threatened to
fire the neighbouring cotts. As they were going away, one of them espied
the skirt of the Duke's coat, and seized him. The soldier no sooner knew
him, than he burst into tears, and reproached himself for the unhappy
discovery. The Duke when taken was quite exhausted with fatigue and
hunger, having had no food since the battle but the peas which he had
gathered in the field. The ash tree is still standing under which the
Duke was apprehended, and is marked with the initials of many of his
friends who afterwards visited the spot.

"The family of the woman who betrayed him were ever after holden in the
greatest detestation, and are said to have fallen into decay, and to
have never thriven afterwards. The house where she lived, which
overlooked the spot, has since fallen down. It was with the greatest
difficulty that any one could be made to inhabit it.

"The Duke was carried before Anthony Etterick, Esq., of Holt, a justice
of the peace, who ordered him to London.

"His gold snuff box was afterwards found in the pea-field, full of gold
pieces, and brought to Mrs. Uvedaile, of Horton. One of the finders had
fifteen pounds for half the contents or value of it.

"Being asked what he would do if set at liberty,--the Duke answered,
that if his horse and arms were restored, he only desired to ride
through the army, and he defied them all to take him again."

       *       *       *       *       *

DRAYTON'S POEMS.

In addition to the notes on Drayton by Dr. Farmer, communicated in your
2nd number, the following occurs in a copy of Drayton's _Poems_, printed
for Smithwicke, in 1610, 12mo.:--

    "See the _Return from Parnassus_ for a good character of
    Drayton.

    "See an _Epigram_ by Drayton, I suppose, prefixed to Morley's
    first _Booke of Balletes_.

    "A Sonnet to _John Davies_, before his _Holy Roode, or Christ's
    Crosse_, 4to. (1610). A Poem in 6 line stanzas.

    "Another to the old edit. of _Wit's Commonwealth_.

    "Commendatory Verses before Chapman's _Hesiod_.

    "Sonnet to Ant. Mundy's 2nd Book of _Primation of Greece_, 1619.

    "His _Heroical Epistles_ were newly enlarged and republished in
    8vo. 1598; which is the most antient edition we have seen or
    read of.--[_Bodl. Cat._]--_Biographia his Art_.

    "Another edition, _as we have heard_, in 1610.--Ibid.

    "See Merc's _Wit's Treasury_, p. 281. A modern edition was
    published by _Oldmixon_.--Cibber's _Lives_, 4. 204.

    "See Warton's _Essay on Pope_, 296.

    "Drayton's last Copy of Verses was prefixed to Sir John
    Beaumont's _Poems_, 1629."

So far Dr. Farmer, whose books are often valuable for the notes on the
fly-leaves. Should any one act upon the suggestion of your
correspondent, and think of a selection from Drayton, it would be
necessary to collate the various editions of his poems, which, as they
are numerous, evince his popularity with his contemporaries.

Malone asserted that the _Baron's Wars_ was not {83} published until
1610. I have before me a copy, probably the first edition, with the
following title: "_The Barrons Wars in the raigne of Edward the Second,
with England's Heroical Epistles_, by Michaell Drayton. At London,
Printed by J.R. for N. Ling, 1603," 12mo.; and the poem had been printed
under the title of _Mortimerindos_, in 4to., 1596.

I have an imperfect copy of an early edition (circa 1600) of "_Poemes
Lyrick and Pastorall. Odes, Eglogs, The Man in the Moon_, by Michaell
Drayton Esquier. At London, printed by R.B. for N.L. and J. Flaskett."

It is now thirty-five years since (eheu! fugaces labuntur anni!) the
writer of this induced his friend Sir Egerton Brydges to print the
_Nymphidia_ at his private press; and it would give him pleasure, should
your Notes be now instrumental to the production of a tasteful selection
from the copious materials furnished by Drayton's prolific muse.
Notwithstanding that selections are not generally approved, in this case
it would be (if judiciously done) acceptable, and, it is to be presumed,
successful.

The _Nymphidia_, full of lively fancy as it is, was probably produced in
his old age, for it was not published, I believe, till 1627, when it
formed part of a small folio volume, containing _The Battaile of
Agincourt_ and _The Miseries of Queene Margarite_. Prefixed to this
volume was the noble but tardy panegyric of his friend Ben Jonson,
entitled _The Vision_, and beginning:

  "It hath been question'd, Michael, if I be
   A friend at all; or, if at all, to thee."

S.W.S.

Mickleham, Nov. 10. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON A PASSAGE IN GOLDSMITH.

Sir,--I observe in the _Athenæum_ of the 17th inst. a quotation from the
_Life of Goldsmith_ by Irving, in which the biographer seems to take
credit for appropriating to Goldsmith the merit of originating the
remark or maxim vulgarly ascribed to Talleyrand, that "the true end of
speech is not so much to express our wants as to conceal them."

This is certainly found in No. 3. of _The Bee_, by Goldsmith, and no
doubt Talleyrand acted upon the principle of dissimulation there
enunciated; but the idea is much older than either of those individuals,
as we learn from a note in p. 113. of vol. lxvii. _Quart. Rev._ quoting
two lines written by Young (nearly one hundred years before), in
allusion to courts:--

  "Where Nature's end of language is declined,
   And men talk only to conceal their mind."

Voltaire has used the same expression so long ago as 1763, in his little
satiric dialogue _La Chapon et la Poularde_, where the former,
complaining of the treachery of men says, "Ils n'emploient les paroles
que pour déguiser leurs pénsees." (see xxix. tom. _Oeuvres Complétes_,
pp. 83, 84. ed. Paris, 1822.)

The germ of the idea is also to be found in Lloyd's _State Worthies_,
where speaking of Roger Ascham, he is characterised as "an honest
man,--none being more able for, yet none more averse to, that
circumlocution and contrivance wherewith some men shadow their main
drift and purpose. Speech was made to open man to man, and not to hide
him; to promote commerce, and not betray it."

Lloyd's book first appeared in 1665, but I use the ed. by Whitworth,
vol. i. p. 503.

F.R.A.

Oak House, Nov. 21. 1849.

    [The further communications proposed to us by F.R.A. will be
    very acceptable.]

       *       *       *       *       *

ANCIENT LIBRARIES--LIBRARY OF THE AUGUSTINIAN EREMITES OF YORK.

Mr. Editor,--I have been greatly interested by the two numbers of the
"NOTES AND QUERIES" which you have sent me. The work promises to be
eminently useful, and if furnished with a good index at the end of each
yearly volume, will become a book indispensable to all literary men, and
especially to those who, like myself, are in charge of large public
libraries.

To testify my good will to the work, and to follow up Mr. Burtt's
remarks on ancient libraries published in your second number, I venture
to send you the following account of a MS. Catalogue of the Library of
the Monastery of the Friars Eremites of the Order of St. Augustine in
the City of York.

This MS. is now preserved in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin,
amongst the MSS. formerly belonging to the celebrated Archbishop Ussher.
It is on vellum, written in the 14th century, and begins thus:--

    "Inventarium omnium librorum pertinentium ad commune armariole
    domus Ebor. ordinis fratrum heremitarum Sancti Augustini, factum
    in presentia fratrum Johannis de Ergum, Johannis Ketilwell,
    Ricardi de Thorpe, Johannis de Appilby, Anno domini Mº. CCC
    lxxij in festo nativitatis virginis gloriose. Fratre Willelmo de
    Stayntoun tunc existente priore."

The volume consists of forty-five leaves, and contains the titles of a
very large and most respectable collection of books in all departments
of literature and learning arranged under the following heads:--

Biblie.
Hystorie scholastice.
Textus biblie glosati.
Postille.
Concordancie et interpretaciones nominum hebreorum. {84}
Originalia. [Under this head are included the
  works of the Fathers, and medieval writers.]
Historie geneium.
Summe doctorum. Scriptores super sententias.
  quodlibet. et questiones.
Tabulæ. [This division contained Indexes to
  various authors, the Scriptures, canon law,
  &c.]
Logicalia et philosophia cum scriptis et commentis.
Prophecie et supersticiosa.
Astronomia et Astrologia.
Instrumenta astrologica magistri Johannis Erghome
  [who appears to have been a great
  benefactor to the Library].
Libri divini officii magistri Johannis Erghome.
Jura civilia.
Jura canonica et leges humane: magistri Johannis
  Erghome.
Auctores et philosophi extranei. [Under this
  head occurs the following entry, "Liber hebraice
  scriptus."]
Gramatica.
Rethorica. [Two leaves of the MS. appear to
  have been cut out here.]
Medicina.
Hystorie et cronice.
Sermones et materie sermonum.
Summe morales doctorum et sermones.
Arithmetica, Musica, Geometria, Perspectiva,
  magistri Johannis Erghome.

Each volume is identified, according to the usual practice, by the words
with which its second folio begins: and letters of tha alphabet are
added, probably to indicate its place on the shelves of the Library. As
a specimen, I shall give the division headed "Biblie":--

BIBLIE

A. Biblia. incipit in 2º. fo. Samuel in[1] heli.
B. Biblia. incipit in 2º. fo. Zechieli qui populo.
  _in duobus voluminibus_.
C. Biblia. inc't. in 2º. fo. mea et in crane.
D. Biblia. inc't. in 2º. fo. ego disperdam.
  ¶ Libri magistri Johannis Erghome
    Biblia. 2º. _fol ravit quosdam._     }
    Interpretationes.                    }--A
E. _Biblia incomplet. diversarum scripturarum.
    quondam fratris R. Bossal. 2º. fo. me
    occidet me etc._

HYSTORIE SCOLASTICE

A. Incipit in 2º. folio. secunda die.
B. inci't. in 2º. fo. emperio sane formatis. _ligatus_.
C. inci't. in 2º. fo. et celumque celi.

The words printed in _Italics_ are added by a more recent hand. Under
the head of "Hystorie Scolastice" are doubtless intended the copies
which the Library possessed of the celebrated _Historia Scholastica_, or
abridgement of Scripture history by Peter Comestor.

From the foregoing specimen, I think your readers will agree with me
that a Catalogue of such antiquity and interest is well worthy of
publication.

But we have another ancient Catalogue of a monastic library equally
curious, and even more important from its magnitude, and the numerous
works it contains on English history, early romances, &c. I remain, &c.

JAMES H. TODD.

Trin. Coll. Dublin, Nov. 27. 1849.

    [Footnote 1: _Sic_ perhaps a mistake for et.]

       *       *       *       *       *

DEFENCE OF A BALD HEAD--THE STATIONERS' REGISTERS.

I am about to supply a deficiency in my last volume of _Extracts from
the Register of the Stationers' Company_ (printed for the Shakespeare
Society, 1849), and thereby set an example that I hope will be followed,
in order that various works, regarding which I could give no, or only
incomplete, information, may be duly illustrated. It is impossible to
expect that any one individual could thoroughly accomplish such an
undertaking; and, by means of your excellent periodical, it will be easy
for literary men, who possess scarce or unique books, mentioned in the
Registers and in my quotations from them, to furnish such brief
descriptions as will be highly curious and very useful.

A tract of this description has just fallen in my way, and it relates to
the subsequent entry on p. 97. of vol. ii. of my _Extracts_: the date is
22nd September, 1579.

    "H. Denham. Lycensed unto him, &c. A Paradox, provinge by reason
    and example that baldnes is much better than bushie heare. vj'd"

When I wrote the comment on this registration I was only acquainted with
the clever MS. ballad in _Defence of a Bald Head_, which I quoted; but I
hardly supposed it to be the production intended. It turns out that it
was not, for I have that production now before me. My belief is that it
is entirely unique; and the only reason for a contrary opinion, that I
am acquainted with, is that there is an incorrect mention of it in
Warton, _H.E.P._ iv. 229.; but there is not a hint of its existence in
Ritson, although it ought to have found a place in his _Bibliographia
Poetica_; neither do I find it noticed in later authorities; if it be,
they have escaped my researches. You will not blame me, then, for
indulging my usual wish to quote the title-page at length, which exactly
agrees with the terms of the entry in the books of the Stationers'
Company. It runs _literatim_ thus:--

    "A Paradoxe, proving by reason and example, that baldnesse is
    much better than bushie haire, &c. Written by that excellent
    philosopher Synesius, Bishop of Thebes, or (as some say) Cyren.
    A prettie pamphlet to pervse, and relenished with
    recreation.--Englished {85} by Abraham Fleming.--Herevnto is
    annexed the pleasant tale of Hemetes the Heremite, pronounced
    before the Queenes Maiestie. Newly recognised both in Latin and
    Englishe, by the said A.F.--[Greek: hae taes sophias phalakra
    saemeion.]--The badge of wisdome is baldnesse.--Printed by H.
    Denham, 1579." 8vo. B.L.

If I am not greatly mistaken, your readers will look in vain for a
notice of the book in any collected list of the many productions of
Abraham Fleming; if I am not greatly mistaken, also, some of them will
be disapppointed if I do not subjoin a few sentences describing more
particularly the contents of the small volume, which (speaking as a
bibliographer) extends to sign. F. iiij in eights.

At the back of the title-page is "The life of Synesius drawen out of
Suydas his gatherings," in Greek and in English. Then comes "The Epistle
Apologeticall to the lettered Reader," signed "Thine for thy pleasure
and profite--Abraham Fleming," which, in excuse for taking up so slight
a subject, contains a very singular notice of the celebrated John
Heywood, the dramatist of the reign of Henry VIII., and of his
remarkable poem _The Spider and the Fly_. The _Pretie Paradoxe_, by
Synesius, next commences, and extends as far as sign. D. v. b. This
portion of the tract is, of course, merely a translation, but it
includes a passage or two from Homer, cleverly rendered into English
verse. Here we come to the word _Finis_, and here, I take it, it was
originally intended that the tract should end; but as it was thought
that it would hardly be of sufficient bulk for the money (4d., or 6d. at
the utmost), a sort of appendix was added, which, on some accounts, is
the most interesting part of the work.

It is headed "The tale of Hemetes the Heremite, pronounced before the
Queene's Maiestie," which Warton, who clearly never saw the book, calls
the "Fable of Hermes." In fact, it is, with a few verbal changes, the
tale of Hemetes, which George Gascoigne presented, in Latin, Italian,
French, and English, to Queen Elizabeth, and of which the MS., with the
portraits of the Queen and the author is among the Royal MSS. in the
British Museum. Fleming tells us that he had "newly recognised"
(whatever may be meant by the words) this tale in Latin and English, but
he does not say a syllable whence he procured it. Gascoigne died two
years before the date of the publication of this _Paradoxe, &c._ so that
Fleming was quite sure the property could never be challenged by the
true owner of it.

Before I conclude, allow me to mention two other pieces by A. Fleming
(who became rector of St. Pancras, Soper-lane, in 1593), regarding which
I am anxious to obtain information, and seek it through the medium of
"NOTES AND QUERIES."

A marginal note in Fleming's Translation of Virgil's _Georgics_, 1589,
4to., is the following:--"The poet alludeth to the historie of Leander
and Hero, written by Museus, and Englished by me a dozen yeares ago, and
in print." My question is, whether such a production is in existence?

Fleming's tract, printed in 1580 in 8vo. (miscalled 16mo.), "A Memorial,
&c. of Mr. William Lambe, Esquier," is well known; but many years ago I
saw, and copied the heading of a _broadside_, which ran thus:--"An
Epitaph, or funeral inscription vpon the godlie life and death of the
Right worshipfull Maister William Lambe Esquire, Founder of the new
Conduit in Holborne," &c. "Deceased the 21st April Anno 1580. Deuised by
Abraham Fleming." At the bottom was--"Imprinted at London by Henrie
Denham for Thomas Turner," &c.

In whose hands, or in what library, I saw this production, has entirely
escaped my memory; and I am now very anxious to learn what has become of
that copy, or whether any other copy of it has been preserved.

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

Kensington, Dec. 3. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROYAL HOUSEHOLD ALLOWANCES

The following warrant for the allowance of the "diet" of a lady of the
bedchamber, will be found to be a good and curious illustration of the
Note of ANTIQUARIUS upon the domestic establishment of Queen Elizabeth,
although more than half a century earlier than the period referred to,
as it relates to the time of Elizabeth's majestic sire:--

    "HENRY R.--By the King.

    "We wol and commaunde you to allowe dailly from hensforth unto
    our right dere and welbilovede the Lady Lucy into hir chambre
    the dyat and fare herafter ensuying; Furst every mornyng at
    brekefast oon chyne of beyf at our kechyn, oon chete loff and
    oon maunchet at our panatry barre, and a Galon of Ale at our
    Buttrye barre; Item at dyner a pese of beyfe, a stroke of roste,
    and a rewarde at our said kechyn, a cast of chete bred at our
    Panatrye barre, and a Galon of Ale at our Buttry barre; Item at
    afternone a manchet at our Panatry bar and half a Galon of Ale
    at our Buttrye barre; Item at supper a messe of Porage, a pese
    of mutton and a Rewarde at our said kechyn, a cast of chete
    brede at our Panatrye, and a Galon of Ale at our Buttrye; Item
    at after supper a chete loff and a maunchet at our Panatry
    barre, a Galon of Ale at our Buttrye barre, and half a Galon of
    Wyne at our Seller barre; Item every mornyng at our Wood yarde
    foure tall shyds and twoo ffagottes; Item at our Chaundrye barre
    in winter every night oon pryket and foure syses of Waxe with
    eight candelles white lights and oon torche; Item at our
    Picherhouse wekely LIX white cuppes; Item at every tyme of our
    remoeving oon hoole carre for the carriage of her stuff. And
    these our lettres shal be your sufficient Warrant and discharge
    in this behalf at all tymes herafter. Yeven under our Signet at
    our Manour of Esthampstede the xvjth. day of July the xiiijth
    year of our Reigne. {86}

    "To the Lord Steward of our Household, the Treasurer,
    Comptroller, Cofferer, Clerke of our Grene Clothe, Clerke of our
    kechyn, and to all other our hed Officers of our seid Houshold
    and to every of theym."

As to Sir Christopher Hatton, I would refer ANTIQUARIUS, and all other
whom it may concern, to Sir Harris Nicolas's ably written _Memoirs of
the "Dancing Chancellor"_, published in 1846. Hatton had amble means for
the building of Holdenby, as he was appointed one of the Gentlemen
Pensioners in 1564, and between that time and his appointment as
Vice-Chamberlain in 1577 (five years prior to the period referred to by
ANTIQUARIUS), he received numerous other gifts and offices.

JOSEPH BURTT.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVERSARIA

Printers' Couplets.

It may not perhaps be generally known that the early printers were
accustomed to place devices or verses along with their names at the end
of the books which they gave to the public. Vigneul-Marville, in his
_Mélanges d'Histoire et de Littérature_, relates that he found the two
following lines at the end of the "Decrees of Basle and Bourges,"
published under the title of "Pragmatic Sanction," with a Commentary by
Côme Guymier,--Andre Brocard's Paris edition, 1507:--

  "Stet liber hic, donec fluctus formica marinos
  Ebibat et totum testudo perambulet orbem."

The printers, it would appear, not only introduced their own names into
these verses, but also the names of the correctors of the press, as may
be seen in the work entitled, _Commentariis Andreæ de Ysernia super
constitutionibus Siciliæ_, printed by Sixtus Riffingerus at Naples in
1472:--

  "Sixtus hoc impressit: sed bis tamen ante revisit
    Egregius doctor Petrus Oliverius.
  At tu quisque emis, lector studiose, libellum
    Lætus emas; mendis nam caret istud opus."

G.J.K.


Charles Martel

Mr. Editor,--Perhaps the subjoined note, extracted from M. Collin de
Plancy's _Bibliothèque des Légendes_, may not be without its value, as
tending to correct an error into which, according to his account, modern
historians have fallen respecting the origin of the surname "Martel,"
borne by the celebrated Charles Martel, son of Peppin of Herstal, Duke
of Austrasia, by his Duchess Alphéide[2]:--

    "It is surprising," he says, "that almost all our modern
    historians, whose profound researches have been so highly
    vaunted, have repeated the little tale of the _Chronicle of St.
    Denis_, which affirms that the surname of Martel was conferred
    on Charles for having hammered (_martelé_) the Saracens. Certain
    writers of the present day style him, in this sense,
    _Karle-le-Marteau_. The word martel, in the ancient Frank
    language, never bore such a signification, but was, on the
    contrary, merely an abbreviation of Martellus, Martin."[3]

From a legend on this subject given by M. de Plancy, it would appear
that Charles received the second name, Martel, in honour of his patron
saint St. Martin.

Not having at present an opportunity of consulting the works of our own
modern writers on early French history, I am ignorant if they also have
adopted the version given in the _Chronicle of St. Denis_. Mr. Ince, in
his little work, _Outlines of French History_, states, that "he received
the surname of _Martel_, or the Hammerer, from the force with which he
_hammered_ down the Saracens--_martel being the name of a weapon which
the ancient Franks used, much resembling a hammer_,--and from his
strokes falling numberless and effectual on the heads of his enemies."
Query.--Which of the two is the more probable version? Perhaps some one
of your numerous correspondents may be enabled to throw addition light
on this disputed point.

G.J.K.

    [Footnote 2: This same Alphéide, or Alpaïde, as she was
    frequently called, though but scurvily treated by posterior
    historians, is honoured by contemporary chroniclers as the
    second wife of Peppin, _uxor altera_. See Frédégaire.]

    [Footnote 3: _Légendes de l'Histoire de France_, par J. Collin
    de Plancy, p. 149. (notes.) Paris. Mellier Frères.]

       *       *       *       *       *

BODENHAM AND LING.

Referring to BOOKWORM's note at p. 29, I beg to observe that the
dedication negativing Bodenham's authorship of _Politeuphuia_ is not
peculiar to the edition of 1597. I have the edition of 1650, "printed by
Ja. Flesher, and are to be sold by Richard Royston, at the Angell in
Ivye Lane," in which the dedication is addressed as follows:--"To his
very good friend Mr. Bodenham, N.L. wisheth increase of happinesse." The
first sentence of this dedication seems to admit that Bodenham was
something more than patron of the work:--"What you seriously begun long
since, and have always been very careful for the full perfection of, at
length thus finished, although perhaps not so well to your expectation,
I present you with; as one before all most worthy of the same: bothe in
respect of your earnest travaile therein, and the great desire you have
continually had for the generall profit."

In Brydges' _Censura Literaria_, Bodenham is spoken of as the _compiler_
of _The Garden of the Muses_, and _editor_ of the _Wit's Commonwealth_,
the {87} _Wit's Theatre of the Little World_, and _England's Helicon_.
He seems to have less claim to be considered the author of the _Wit's
Theatre_ than of the _Wit's Commonwealth_, for in the original edition
of the former, "printed by J.R. for N.L., and are to be sold at the West
doore of Paules, 1599," the dedication is likewise addressed, "To my
most esteemed and approved loving friend, Maister J.B. I wish all
happines." After acknowledging his obligations to his patron, the author
proceeds: "Besides this History or Theatre of the Little World, suo
jure, first challengeth your friendly patronage, by whose motion I
undertooke it, and for whose love I am willing to undergoe the heavy
burden of censure. I must confesse that it might have been written with
more maturitie, and deliberation, but in respect of my promise, I have
made this hast, how happy I know not, yet good enough I hope, if you
vouchsafe your kind approbation: which with your judgement I hold
ominous, and as under which Politeuphuia was so gracious."

I.F.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRAVELLING IN ENGLAND.

Sir,--I beg to acknowledge the notice which two of your correspondents
have taken of my query on this subject. At the same time I must say that
the explanations which they offer appear to me to be quite
unsatisfactory. I shall be happy to give my reasons for this, if you
think it worth while; but, perhaps, if we wait a little, some other
solution may be suggested.

For the sake of the inhabitants, I hope that your work is read at
Colchester. Is there nobody there who could inform us at what time the
London coach started a century ago? It seems clear that it arrived in
the afternoon--but I will not at present trespass further on your
columns. I am, &c.,

G.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

Ancient Inscribed Alms Dish.

L.S.B. informs us that in the church of St. Paul, Norwich, is a brass
dish, which has been gilt, and has this legend round it four times
over:--"HER: I: LIFRID: GRECHº: WART."[4]

This seems to be another example of the inscription which was
satisfactorily explained in No. 5. p. 73.

    [Footnote 4: Blomefeld's _Norfolk_. Folio. 1739. Vol. ii. p.
    803.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Bishop that burneth.

I do not think Major Moor is correct in his application of Tusser's
words, "the bishop that burneth," to the lady-bird. Whether lady-birds
are unwelcome guests in a dairy I know not, but certainly I never heard
of their being accustomed to haunt such places. The true interpretation
of Tusser's words must, I think, be obtained by comparison with the
following lines from his _Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry_, quoted
in Ellis's _Brand_, iii. 207.:--

  "Blesse Cisley (good mistress) that bishop doth ban
  For burning the milk of her cheese to the pan."

The reference here, as well as in the words quoted by Major Moor, is
evidently to the proverb relating to burnt milk, broth, &c.--"the bishop
has put his foot in it;" which is considered by Ellis to have had its
origin in those times when bishops were much in the habit of burning
heretics. He confirms this interpretation by the following curious
passage from Tyndale's _Obedyence of a Crysten Man_:--

    "If the podech be burned to, or the meate ouer rosted, we saye
    the Byshope hath put his fote in the potte, or the Byshope hath
    playd the coke, because the Bishopes burn who they lust, and
    whosoeuer displeaseth them."

I fear the origin of the appellation "Bishop Barnaby," applied to the
lady-bird in Suffolk, has yet to be sought.

D.S.


Iron Manufactures of Sussex.

Sir,--I have made two extracts from a once popular, but now forgotten
work, illustrative of the iron manufacture which, within the last
hundred years, had its main seat in this county, which I think may be
interesting to many of your readers who may have seen the review of Mr.
Lower's _Essay on the Ironworks of Sussex_ in the recent numbers of the
_Athenæum_ and _Gentleman's Magazine_. The anecdote at the close is
curious, as confirming the statements of Macaulay; the roads in Sussex
in the 18th century being much in the condition of the roads in England
generally in the 17th. "Sowsexe," according to the old proverb, has
always been "full of dirt and mier."

    "From hence (Eastbourne) it was that, turning north, and
    traversing the deep, dirty, but rich part of these two counties
    (Kent and Sussex), I had the curiosity to see the great
    foundries, or ironworks, which are in this county (Sussex), and
    where they are carried on at such a prodigious expense of wood,
    that even in a county almost all overrun with timber, they begin
    to complain of their consuming it for those furnaces and leaving
    the next age to want timber for building their navies. I must
    own, however, that I found that complaint perfectly groundless,
    the three counties of _Kent_, _Sussex_, and _Hampshire_ (all
    which lye contiguous to one another), being one inexhaustible
    storehouse of timber, never to be destroyed, but by a general
    conflagration, and able, at this time, to supply timber to
    rebuild all the royal navies in Europe, if they were all to be
    destroyed, and set about the building them together.

    "I left _Tunbridge_ ... and came to _Lewes_, through the
    deepest, dirtiest, but many ways the richest and most profitable
    country in all that part of England. {88}

    "The timber I saw here was prodigious, as well in quantity as in
    bigness, and seem'd in some places to be suffered to grow only
    because it was so far off of any navigation, that it was not
    worth cutting down and carrying away; in dry summers, indeed a
    great deal is carried away to Maidstone and other parts on the
    Medway; and sometimes I have seen one tree on a carriage, which
    they call here a _tug_, drawn by two-and-twenty oxen, and even
    then this carried so little a way, and then thrown down and left
    for other _tugs_ to take up and carry on, that sometimes it is
    two or three years before it gets to Chatham; for if once the
    rains come in it stirs no more that year, and sometimes a whole
    summer is not dry enough to make the roads passable. Here I had
    a sight which, indeed, I never saw in any other part of England,
    namely, that going to church at a country village, not far from
    _Lewes_, I saw an ancient lady, and a lady of very good quality,
    I assure you, drawn to church in her coach with six oxen; nor
    was it done in frolic or humour, but mere necessity, the way
    being so stiff and deep that no horses could go in it."--_A Tour
    through Great Britain by a Gentleman_. London, 1724. Vol. i. p.
    54. Letter II.

Factotum

    "He was so farre the _dominus fac totum_ in this _juncto_ that
    his words were laws, all things being acted according to his
    desire."--p. 76. of Foulis' _Hist. of Plots of our Pretended
    Saints_, 2nd edit. 1674

F.M.


Birthplace of Andrew Borde

Hearne says, in Wood's _Athenæ_, "that the Doctor was not born at
Pevensey or Pensey, but at Boonds-hill in Holmsdayle, in Sussex."

Should we not read "Borde-hill?" That place belonged to the family of
Borde for many generations. It is in Cuckfield parish. The house may be
seen from the Ouse-Valley Viaduct.

J.F.M.


Order of Minerva

    "We are informed that his Majesty is about to institute a new
    order of knighthood, called _The Order of Minerva_, for the
    encouragement of literature, the fine arts, and learned
    professions. The new order is to consist of twenty-four knights
    and the Sovereign; and is to be next in dignity to the military
    Order of the Bath. The knights are to wear a silver star with
    nine points, and a straw-coloured riband from the right shoulder
    to the left. A figure of Minerva is to be embroidered in the
    centre of the star, with this motto, 'Omnia posthabita
    Scientiæ.' Many men eminent in literature, in the fine arts, and
    in physic, and law, are already thought of to fill the Order,
    which, it is said, will be instituted before the meeting of
    parliament."--_Perth Magazine_, July, 1772.

SCOTUS.


Flaws of Wind

The parish church of Dun-Nechtan, now Dunnichen, was dedicated to St.
Causlan, whose festival was held in March. Snow showers in March are
locally called "St. Causlan's flaws."

SCOTUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES ANSWERED.

DORNE THE BOOKSELLER AND HENNO RUSTICUS.

Sir,--Circumstances imperatively oblige me to do that from which I
should willingly be excused--reply to the observations of J.I., inserted
in page 75. of the last Saturday's Number of the "NOTES AND QUERIES."

The subject of these are three questions proposed by me in your first
number to the following effect:--1. Whether any thing was known,
especially from the writings of Erasmus, of a bookseller and publisher
of the Low Countries named Dorne, who lived at the beginning of the
sixteenth century? Or, 2ndly, of a little work of early date callled
_Henno Rusticus_? Or, 3dly, of another, called _Of the Sige (Signe) of
the End_?

To these no answer has yet been given, although the promised researches
of a gentleman of this University, to whom literary inquirers in Oxford
have ever reason to be grateful, would seem to promise one soon, if it
can be made. But, in the mean time, the knot is cut in a simpler way:
neither Dorne, nor _Henno Rusticus_, his book, it is said, ever existed.
Permit me one word of expostulation upon this.

It is perfectly true that the writing of the MS. which has given rise to
these queries and remarks is small, full of contradictions, and
sometimes difficult to be read; but the contractions are tolerably
uniform and consistent, which, to those who have to do with such
matters, is proved to be no inconsiderable encouragement and assistance.
A more serious difficulty arises from the circumstance, that the
bookselller used more than one language, and none always correctly.
Still it may be presumed he was not so ignorant as to make a blunder in
spelling his own name. And the first words of the manuscript are these:
"+In nomine domini amen ego Johannes dorne, &c. &c." (In noie domi ame
ego Johanes dorne, &c.) From the inspection of a close copy now lying
before me, in which all the abbreviations are retained, and from my own
clear recollection, I am enabled to state that, to my full belief, the
name of "dorne" is written by the man himself in letters at length,
without any contraction whatever; and that the altered form of it,
"Domr," as applied to that particular person, exists nowhere whatever,
except in page 75. of No. 5 of the "NOTES AND QUERIES."

The words "henno rusticus" (heno rusticus) are found twice, and are
tolerably clearly written in both cases. Of the "rusticus" nothing need
be said; but the first _n_ in "henno" is expressed by a contraction,
which in the MS. _very_ commonly denotes that letter, and sometimes the
final _m_. How frequently it represents _n_ may be judged from the fact
that in the few words already quoted, the final _n_ in "amen," and the
first in "Johannes," are supplied by it. So that {89} we have to choose
between "henno" and "hemno" rusticus (rather a clown than a gentleman,
whatever was his name; and perhaps the treatise, if ever found, will
prove to treat merely on rural affairs). And although it may turn out to
be perfectly true that "homo rusticus" was the thing meant, as your
correspondent suggests, still that is not the question at issue; but
rather, amidst the confusion of tongues and ideas which seems to have
possessed poor Dorne's brain, what he actually wrote, rather than what
he should have written.

Admitting, however, for supposition's sake, that your correspondent is
right, that the man was named Dormer, and the book _Homo rusticus_--is
there any one who will obligingly favour me with information respecting
these, or either of them?

One word more, and I have done; though perhaps you will think that too
much has been said already upon a subject not of general interest; and
indeed I cannot but feel this, as well as how painful it is to differ,
even in opinion, with one towards whom nothing can be due from me but
respect and affection. But the direct inference from your
correspondent's remarks (although it is fully my persuasion he neither
designed nor observed it) is, that my difficulties are no difficulties
at all, but mistakes. To these we are all liable, and none more so than
the individual who is now addressing you, though, it is to be hoped, not
quite in the awful proportion which has been imputed to him. And let it
stand as my apology for what has been said, that I owe it no less to my
own credit, than perhaps to that of others, my kind encouragers and
abettors in these inquiries, to vindicate myself from the charge of one
general and overwhelming error, that of having any thing to do with the
editing of a MS. of which my actual knowledge should be so small, that
out of _three_ difficulties propounded from it contents, _two_ should be
capable of being shown to have arisen from nothing else but my inability
to read it. I remain, Sir, your obedient servant,

W.

Trin. Coll. Oxon. Dec. 5, 1849.

    [We have inserted the foregoing letter in compliance with the
    writer's wishes, but under a protest; because no one can
    entertain a doubt as to his ability to edit in a most
    satisfactory manner the work he has undertaken; and because also
    we can bear testimony to the labour and conscientious
    painstaking which he is employing to clear up the various
    obscure points in that very curious document. The following
    communication from a valued correspondent, in answering W.'s
    Query as to _Henno Rusticus_, confirms the accuracy of his
    reading.]


HENNO RUSTICUS.

The query of your correspondent W. at p. 12, No. 1. regards, I presume,
_Henno Comediola Rustico Ludicra, nunc iterum publicata_; Magdeburg,
1614, 8vo.? If so, he will find it to be identical with the _Scænica
Progymnasmata h. e. Ludicra Præexercitamenta_ of Reuchlin, first printed
at Strasburg in 1497, and frequently reprinted during the first part of
the sixteenth century, often with a commentary by Jacob Spiegel.

A copy, which was successively the property of Mr. Bindley and Mr.
Heber, is now before me. It was printed at Tubingen by Thomas Anselm in
1511. I have another copy by the same printer, in 1519; both in small
4to.

Reuchlin, while at Heidelberg, had amused himself by writing a satirical
drama, entitled _Sergius seu Capitis Caput_, in ridicule of his absurd
and ignorant monkish opponent. This he purposed to have had represented
by some students, for the amusement of his friends; but Dalberg, for
prudent reasons, dissuaded its performance. It being known, however,
that a dramatic exhibition was intended, not to disappoint those who
were anxiously expecting it, Reuchlin hastily availed himself of the
very amusing old farce of _Maistre Pierre Patelin_, and produced his
_Scænica Progymnasmata_, in which the _Rustic Henno_ is the principal
character. It varies much, however, from its prototype, is very
laughable, and severely satirical upon the defects of the law and the
dishonesty of advocates.

Its popularity is evinced by the numerous editions; and, as the
commentary was intended for the instruction of youth in the niceties of
the Latin language, it was used as a school-book; the copies shared the
fate of such books, and hence its rarity. It is perhaps the earliest
comic drama of the German stage, having been performed before Dalberg,
Bishop of Worms (at Heidelberg in 1497), to whom it is also inscribed by
Reuchlin. It seems to have given the good bishop great pleasure, and he
requited each of the performers with a gold ring and some gold coin.
Their names are recorded at the end of the drama.

Melchior Adam gives the following account:--

    "Ibi Comoediam scripsit, _Capitis Caput_ plenam nigri salis &
    acerbitatis adversus Monachum, qui ejus vitæ insidiatus erat.
    Ibi & alteram Comoediam edidit _fabulam Gallicam_, plenam
    candidi salis; in qua forensia sophismata præcipue taxat. Hanc
    narrabat hac occasione scriptam & actam esse. Cum alteram de
    Monacho scipsisset, fama sparsa est de agenda Comoedia, quod
    illo tempore inusitatum erat. Dalburgius lecta, illius Monachi
    insectatione, dissuasit editionem & actionem, quod eodem tempore
    & apud Philipum Palatinum Franciscanus erat _Capellus_, propter
    potentiam & malas artes invisus nobilibus & sapientibus viris in
    aula. Intellexit periculum Capnio & hanc Comoediam occultavit.
    Interea tamen, quia flagitabatur actio, alteram dulcem fabellam
    edit, & repræsentari ab ingeniosis adolescentibus, quorum ibi
    extant nomina, curat."

Mr. Hallam (_Literat. of Europe_, vol. i. p. 292., {90} 1st ed.), misled
by Warton and others, gives a very defective and erroneous account of
the _Progymnasmata Scænica_, which he supposed to contain several
dramas; but he concludes by saying, "the book is very scarce, and I have
never seen it." Gottsched, in his _History of the German Drama_, merely
says he had seen some notice of a Latin drama by Reuchlin. Hans Sachs
translated it into German, after his manner, and printed it in 1531
under the title of _Henno_.

S.W.S.

Mickleham, Dec. 1. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

MYLES BLOMEFYLDE--ORTUS VOCABULORUM.

Sir,--In reference to the Query of BURIENSIS in No. 4. of your
periodical, as to the parentage of Myles Blomefylde, of Bury St.
Edmund's, I beg to contribute the following information. In the library
of St. John's College, Cambridge, is a volume containing an _unique_
copy of "the boke called the Informacyon for pylgrymes vnto the holy
lande," printed by Wynkyn de Worde, in 1524, at the end of which occurs
the following manuscript note:--

    "I, Myles Blomefylde, of Burye Saynct Edmunde in Suffolke, was
    borne ye yeare following after ye pryntyng of this boke (that
    is to saye) in the yeare of our Lorde 1525, the 5 day of Apryll,
    betwene 10 & 11, in ye nyght, nyghest xi, my father's name
    John, and my mother's name Anne."

This tract is bound up with two others, on both of which Blomefylde has
written his initials, and from one entry seems to have been at Venice in
1568. He was undoubtedly an ardent book-collector, and I possess copies
of the _Ortus Vocabulorum_, printed by W. de Worde, in 1518, and the
_Promptuarium Parvulorum_, printed by the same, in 1516, bound together,
on both of which the name of _Myles Blomefylde_ in inscribed.

I may add, as a slight contribution to a future edition of the
_Typographical Antiquities_, that among Bagford's curious collection of
title-pages in the Harleian Collection of MSS. (which I doubt if Dr.
Dibdin ever consulted with care), there is the last leaf of an edition
of the _Ortus Vocabulorum_, unnoticed by bibliographers, with the
following colophon:--

    "Impr. London. per Wynandum de Worde, commorantem in vico
    nuncupato Fletestrete, sub intersignio solis aurei, Anno
    incarnatiôis Dominice M.CCCCC.IX. die vero prima mêsis
    Decêbris."--_Harl. MSS._ 5919. art. 36.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO MINOR QUERIES.

The Curse of Scotland--Why the Nine of Diamonds is so called.

When I was a child (now about half a century ago) my father used to
explain the origin of the nine of diamonds being called "The curse of
Scotland" thus: That it was the "_cross_ of Scotland," which, in the
Scotch pronunciation, had become "curse."

St. Andrew is the patron saint of Scotland: he suffered on a cross, not
of the usual form, but like the letter X, which has since been commonly
called a St. Andrew's cross. It was supposed that the similarity of the
nine of diamonds to this form occasioned its being so called. The arms
of the Earl of Stair, alluded to in your publication, are exactly in the
form of this cross. If this explanation should be useful, you are most
welcome to it.

A.F.


Thistle of Scotland.

Sir,--Your correspondent R.L. (No. 2. p. 24.), will find the fullest
information on this head in Sir Harris Nicolas's work on the _Orders of
Knighthood of the British Empire_. He does not assign to its origin an
earlier date than the reign of James III, in an inventory of whose
jewels, Thistles are mentioned as part of the ornaments. The motto
"_Nemo me impune lacessit_," does not appear until James VI. adopted it
on his coinage.

G.H.B.


For Scottish Thistle, see Nisbet's _Heraldry_, vol. ii. _Order of St.
Andrew_. Selden, _Titles of Honour_, p. 704. ed. 1672, refers to
"Menenius, Miræus, Favin, and such more."

SCOTUS.


Record Publications.

Will any of your readers kindly favour me with a reference to any
easily-accessible list of the publications of the Record Commission, as
well as to some account of the more valuable Rolls still remaining
unpublished, specifying where they exist, and how access is to be
obtained to them?

With every wish for the success of your undertaking,

Yours, &c.

D.S.

    [The late Sir H. Nicolas compiled an account of the publications
    of the Record Commission, which was published in his _Notitia
    Historica_, and also in an 8vo. vol, and is easily obtainable.
    There is also a series of articles in the _Gentleman's Magazine_
    for 1834, which contains a good deal of information upon the
    subject, with a classified list of the publications. The
    principal unpublished records are in the Tower and the Rolls'
    Chapel; any record may be inspected or copied at those places,
    or in any other Record Office, upon payment of a fee of one
    shilling.]


Katherine Pegge.

Sir,--Katherine Pegge, one of the mistresses of Charles II., was the
daughter of Thomas Pegge, of Yeldersley, near Ashborne in Derbyshire,
Esq., where the family had been settled for several generations, and
where Mr. William Pegge, the last of the elder branch, died without
issue in 1768. Another branch of this family was of Osmaston, in the
same neighbourhood, and of this {91} was Dr. Samuel Pegge, the learned
antiquary. They bore for arms:--Argent, a chevron between three piles,
sable. Crest:--A demi-sun issuing from a wreath or, the rays alternately
argent and sable.

It was during his exile that the King first met with the fair Katherine,
and in 1657 had a son by her, whom he called Charles Fitz-Charles,--not
Fitz-roy as Granger says. Fitz-Charles had a grant of the royal arms
with a baton sinistre, vairé; and in 1675 his Majesty created him Earl
of Plymouth, Viscount Totness, and Baron Dartmouth. He was bred to the
sea, and having been educated abroad,--most probably in Spain,--was
known by the name of Don Carlos. In 1678 the Earl married the Lady
Bridget Osborne, third daughter of Thomas Earl of Danby, and died of a
flux at the siege of Tangier in 1680, without issue.

Katherine Pegge, the Earl's mother, after her _liaison_ with the King,
married Sir Edward Greene, Bart., of Samford in Essex, and died without
issue by him in ----. From this marriage the King is sometimes said to
have had a mistress named Greene.

There was long preserved in the family a half-length portrait of the
Earl, in a robe de chamber, laced cravat, and flowing hair (with a ship
in the back-ground of the picture), by Sir Peter Lely; and also two of
his mother, Lady Greene: one a half length, with her infant son standing
by her side, the other a three-quarters,--both by Sir Peter Lely, or by
one of his pupils.

Both mother and son are said to have been eminently beautiful.

G.M.

East Winch, Nov. 30.


N., who refers our Querist for particulars of this lady to the "Memoirs
of the Rev. Dr. Samuel Pegge and his Family," in Nichols' _Literary
Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century_, vol. vi. pp. 224, 225, adds--"As
the lady had no issue by Sir Edward Greene, it perhaps does not matter
what his family was.

    "I see he was created a baronet 26th July, 1660, and died s. p.
    Dec. 1676; and that Courthope, in his _Extinct Baronetage_,
    calls his lady 'dau. of ---- Pegg,' not being aware of her
    importance as the mother of the Earl of Plymouth. This may be
    worth remarking."


The Rev. T. Leman.

Sir,--Your correspondent A.T. will find the information he requires
respecting the Reverend Thomas Leman, of Bath, in the _Gentleman's
Magazine_ for Oct. 1826, p. 373.; for Aug. 1828, p. 183.; and for Feb.
1829. He may also consult Britton's _Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and
Character of Henry Hatcher_.

G.M.


A Memoir of the Rev. Thomas Leman will be found in Nichols's
_Illustrations of Literature_, vol. vi. p. 435, _et seq._, comprising an
enumeration of his writings in various county histories and other works
of that character, and followed by eighteen letters addressed to Mr.
Nicholls, J.N. Brewer, Esq., and the Rev. Dr. Samuel Parr.

N.


Burnet Prize at Aberdeen.

Sir,--I sent a _query_ to the _Athenæum_, who, by a _note_, referred it
to you.

My object is to ascertain _who gained_ the last _Theological Premium_
(forty years since, or nearly) at Aberdeen. You no doubt know the
subject: it is the best Treatise on "the Evidence that there is a Being
all powerful, wise, and good, by whom every thing exists; and
particularly to obviate difficulties regarding the wisdom and goodness
of the Deity; and this, in the first place from considerations
independent of Written Revelation, and, in the second place, from the
revelation of the Lord Jesus; and, from the whole, to point out the
inferences most necessary for and useful to mankind."

I wish to know who gained the first prize, and _who_ the second premium.

H. ANDREW

Manchester, Nov. 27, 1849.

    [We are happy to be able to answer our correspondent's query at
    once. The first Burnet prize, on the last occasion, was gained
    by the Reverend William Lawrence Brown, D.D., and Principal, if
    we recollect rightly, of Mareschal College, Aberdeen. His prize
    work, entitled _Essay on the Existence of a Supreme Being
    possessed of Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness_, was
    published at Aberdeen in 2 vols. 8vo. 1816. The second prize man
    was the present amiable and distinguished Archbishop of
    Canterbury. His work, entitled _A Treatise on the Records of
    Creation_, was published in London, in 2 vols. 8vo. 1816.]


Incumbents of Church Livings.

Sir,--In answer to the Query of your correspondent L., I beg to inform
him that he may find the _name_, if not the birth-place, of incumbents
and patrons of Church Livings in the county of Norfolk, long prior to
1680, in the Institution Books at Norwich, consisting of numerous well
preserved folio volumes. Blomefield and Parkin, the historians of the
county, have made ample use of these inestimable books.

G.M.


History of Landed and Commercial Policy of England--History of Edward
II.

In reply to the two queries of your correspondent ANGLO-CAMBRIAN:--

1. The _Remarks upon the History of the Landed and Commercial Policy of
England_ was written by the Rev. Joseph Hudson, Prebendary of Carlisle,
1782, "a judicious and elegant writer, who could not be prevailed on to
give his name with it to the public."--See Nichols's _Literary Anecdotes
of the Eighteenth Century_, vol. viii. p. 160, note. {92} Mr. N.
characterises it as "a valuable work, richly deserving to be better
known."

2. There are two histories of King Edward II., one in small _folio_, of
which the title is accurately given by your correspondent, and another
in 8vo., the title of which is given at the head of the reprint in the
_Harleian Miscellany_, vol. i. p. 69. Both these editions bear the date
of 1680. I had always supposed that the edition in 8vo. was a mere
reprint of the folio; but on now comparing the text of the folio with
that of the 8vo. as given in the _Harl. Miscellany_, I find the most
essential differences; so much so, as hardly to be recognised as the
same. Mr. Park, the last editor of the _Harl. Miscellany_ (who could
only find the folio), appears to have been puzzled by these differences,
and explains them by the supposition that the diction has been much
modified by Mr. Oldys (the original editor of the _Miscellany_), a
supposition which is entirely erroneous. The "Publisher's Advertisement
to the Reader," and the "Author's Preface to the Reader," signed "E.F.,"
and dated "Feb. 20, 1627," are both left out in the 8vo.; and it will be
seen that the anonymous authorship and date of composition in the
title-page are suppressed, for which we have substituted "found among
the papers of, and (supposed to be) writ by, the Right Honourable Henry
Viscount Faulkland."

Antony Wood, without absolutely questioning its authenticity, seems to
have regarded it as a mere ephemeral production, as brought out at a
time "when the press was open for all such books that could make any
thing against the then government, with a preface to the reader patch'd
up from very inconsiderable authors, by Sir Ja. II. as is
supposed."--_Athen. Oxom._ vol. ii. p. 565. There is not the slightest
evidence to connect the authorship either of the folio or the 8vo. with
Henry Viscount Falkland.

Your correspondent A.T. (p. 59.) will find all the information he
desires about the Rev. Thomas Leman, and the assistance he rendered to
Mr. Hatcher in his edition of _Richard of Cirencester_, in Mr. Britton's
own _Autobiography_. See pp. 7 and 8.

C.L.L.


To eat Humble Pie.

Mr. Editor,--Your correspondent, Mr. HAMMACK, having recorded Mr.
Pepys's love of "brave venison pasty," whilst asking the derivation of
the phrase, "eating humble pie," in reference to a bill of fare of
Pepys's age, I venture to submit that the _humble pie_ of that period
was indeed the pie named in the list quoted; and not only so, but that
it was made out of the "umbles" or entrails of the deer, a dish of the
second table, inferior of course to the venison pasty which smoked upon
the dais, and therefore not inexpressive of that humiliation which the
term "eating humble pie" now painfully describes. The "umbles" of the
deer are constantly the perquisites of the gamekeeper.

A.G.

Ecclesfield, Nov. 24, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

Eva, Daughter of Dermot Mac Murrough.

Mr. Editor,--I should be glad if any of your readers, Irish or English,
could inform me whether we have any other mention of Eva, daughter of
Dermot Mac Murrough, last independent king of Leinster, than that she
became, in the spring of the year 1170, the wife of Richard Strongbow,
Earl of Pembroke, at Waterford.

Any fortunate possessor of O'Donovan's new translation of _The Annals of
the Four Masters_, would much oblige me by referring to the dates 1135
and 1169, and also to the period included between them, for any casual
notice of the birth of this Eva, or mention of other slight incident
with which she is connected, which may there exist.

A. HAPLESS HUNTER

Malvern Wells, Nov. 20, 1849.


John de Daundelyon.

Sir,--In the north chancel of St. John's Church, Margate, is a fine
brass for John Daundelyon, 1445, with a large dog at his feet; referring
to which the Rev. John Lewis, in his _History of the Isle of Tenet_,
1723 (p. 98.), says:

    "The two last bells were cast by the same founder, and the tenor
    the gift of one of the family of Daundelyon, which has been
    extinct since 1460. Concerning this bell the inhabitants repeat
    this traditionary rhyme:

      "John de Daundelyon, with his great dog,
      Brought over this bell on a mill-cog."

This legend is still given to visitors of this fine old church. Will
some of your antiquarian correspondents throw some light on the
obscurity?

C.


Genealogy of European Sovereigns.

Sir,--Can you or any of your correspondents tell me of one or two of the
best works on the "Genealogy of European Sovereigns?" I know of
one,--Anderson's _Royal Genealogies_, London, 1732, folio. But that is
not of as late a date as I should wish to see.

Q.X.Z.


Duke of Ashgrove.

At p. 14. of Doctor Simon Forman's _Diary_ (edited by Mr. Halliwell,
1849), mention is twice made of Forman being engaged as "Scholmaster to
the _Duke of Ashgrove's_ Sonnes." Who was the person thus alluded to?

P.C.S.S. {93}


Sir William Godbold.

Mr. Editor,--In the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for July, 1842, occurs
this:--

    "In the parish church of Mendham, Suffolk, is a mural monument
    bearing an inscription, of which the following is a transcript:

    "'M.S.V.Cmi Doctissimique D. Gulielmi Godbold Militis ex
    illustri et perantiquâ Prosapiâ oriundi, Qui post Septennem
    Peregrinationem animi excolendi gratiâ per Italiam, Græciam,
    Palæstinam, Arabiam, Persiam, in solo natali in bonarum
    literarum studiis consenescens morte repentinâ obiit Londini
    mense Aprilis Ao. D. MDCXIIIC, ætatis LXIX.'

    "One would presume that so great a traveller would have obtained
    some celebrity in his day; but I have never met with any notice
    of Sir William Godbold. I have ascertained that he was the only
    son of Thomas Godbold, a gentleman of small estate residing at
    Metfield, in Suffolk, and was nephew to John Godbold, Esq.,
    Serjeant-at-Law, who was appointed Chief Justice of the Isle of
    Ely in 1638. He appears to have been knighted previously to
    1664, and married Elizabeth daughter and heir of Richard
    Freston, of Mendham (Norfolk), Esq., and relict of Sir Nicholas
    Bacon, of Gillingham, Bart., whom he survived, and died without
    issue in 1687. I should consider myself under an obligation to
    any of your correspondents who could afford me any further
    account of this learned knight, or refer me to any biographical
    or other notice of him."

To the writer of that letter the desideratum still remains unsupplied.
Your welcome publication appears to offer a channel for repeating the
inquiry.

G.A.C.


Ancient motto.

Many years since I read that some pope or emperor caused the following,
or a motto very similar to it, to be engraven in the centre of his
table:--

    "Si quis amiecum absentem rodere delectat ad hanc mensam
    accumbere indignus est."

It being a maxim which all should observe in the daily intercourse of
life, and in the propriety of which all must concur, I send this to
"NOTES AND QUERIES" (the long wished-for medium), in the hopes that some
kind "note-maker" can inform me from whence this motto is taken, and to
whom ascribed.

J.E.M.


Works of King Alfred.

Sir,--If any of your readers can inform me of MSS. of the Works of Kings
Alfred the Great, besides those which are found in the larger public
collections of MSS., he will confer a favour not only on the Alfred
Committee, who propose to publish a complete edition of King Alfred's
Works, but also on their Secretary, who is your obedient servant,

J.A. GILES.

Bampton, Oxford, Nov. 23. 1849


"Bive" and "Chote" Lambs.

I should be much obliged to any of your readers who would favour me with
an explanation of the words "Bive" and "Chote." They were thus applied in
an inventory taken Kent.

  "27 Hen. VIII. Michaelm.
  Bive lambes at xvid. the pece.
  Chote lambes at xiid. the pece."

T.W.


Anecdote of the Civil Wars.

Horace Walpole alludes to an anecdote of a country gentleman, during the
Civil Wars, falling in with one of the armies on the day of some battle
(Edgehill or Naseby?) as he was _quietly going out with his hounds_.
Where did Walpole find this anecdote?

C.


A Political Maxim--when first used.

Who first used the phrase--"_When bad men conspire, good men must
combine_"?

C.


Richard of Cirencester

S.A.A. inquires whether the authenticity of Richard of Cirencester, the
Monk of Westminster, has ever been satisfactorily proved. The prevailing
opinion amongst some of the greatest antiquaries has been that the work
was a forgery by Dr. Bertram, of Copenhagen, with a view of testing the
antiquarian knowledge of the famous Dr. Stukeley; of this opinion was
the learned and acute Dr. Whittaker and Mr. Conybeare. It is also
further worthy of mention that some years since, when the late Earl
Spencer was in Copenhagen, he searched in vain for the original
manuscript, which no one there could tell him had ever existed, and very
many doubt if it ever existed at all.


Lord Erskine's Brooms.

When and where was it that a man was apprehended for selling brooms
without a hawker's licence, and defended himself by showing that they
were the agricultural produce of Lord Erskine's property, and that he
was Lord E.'s servant?

GRIFFIN.


John Bell of the Chancery Bar.

When did John Bell cease to practise in the Court of Chancery, and when
did he give up practice altogether, and when was the conversation with
Lord Eldon on that subject supposed to have take place?

GRIFFIN


Billingsgate.

Mr. Editor--Stow, in his _Survey of London_, with reference to
Billingsgate, states, from Geoffrey of Monmouth, "that it was built by
Belin, a king of the Britons, whose ashes were enclosed in a vessel of
brass, and set upon a high pinnacle of {94} stone over the same _Gate_."
... "That it was the largest water _Gate_ on the River of Thames." ...
"That it is at this day a large water _Gate_," &c. Can you, Mr. Editor,
or any of your respected correspondents, refer me to any drawing or
description of the said _Gate_?

WILLIAM WILLIAMS.

Rood Lane, Nov. 24. 1849.


Family of Pointz of Greenham.

Mr. Editor,--Can any of your readers inform me if that branch of the
ancient family of _Pointz_, which was seated at Greenham, in the parish
of Ashbrittle, in Somersetshire, is extinct, and when the male issue
failed? Some of them intermarried with the Chichesters, Pynes, and other
old Devonshire families.

The Pointzes remained at Greenham after 1600.

L.B.


Marescaucia.

Sir,--In the _Testa de Nevill_ appear the following entries:--

    P. 237. a "terra Willi de Montellis (read Moncellis) in villa de
    Cumpton pertinet ad _marescauciam_ domini Regis," &c.

    P. 2269. a. "Will's de Munceus tenet Parvam Angram (Little
    Ongar, in Essex) de Domino Rege de _Mareschaucie_ quæ fuit de
    Baronia Gilberti de Tani."

    P. 235. b. "Waleramus de Munceus tenet Cumpton per serjantiam
    _Marescautiæ_."

If any of your readers can throw any light on the signification of the
word "Marescautia," occurring in these extracts, and the tenure referred
to, they will greatly oblige

D.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

The Work of Walter Mapes, "_De Nugis Curialium_," respecting which we
inserted a Query from the Rev. L.B. Larking, in our last number, is
editing for the Camden Society by Mr. Wright, and will form one of the
next publications issued to the members.

Messrs. Sotheby and Co., of Wellington Street, Strand, will be occupied
during the week commencing on Monday, the 17th instant, with the sale of
"the third portion of the stock of the late eminent bookseller, Mr.
Thomas Rodd, comprising rare and valuable works of the early English
poets and dramatists; facetiæ, romances, and novels, and other
departments of elegant literature."

Mr. Rodd's knowledge, great in all departments of bibliography, was
particularly so in that of our early poetical and dramatical writers;
and although the numerous commissions he held for such rarities in it as
he secured, necessarily prevented their being left upon his shelves, the
present collection exhibits a number of articles calculated to interest
our bibliographical friends, as the following specimens of a few Lots
will show:--

578 Dedekindus (Fred.) School of Slovenrie, or Cato turned Wrong Side
Outward, in Verse, by R.F. Gent. _very rare, original binding: sold at
Perry's sale for_ £11 11s. 1605

591 De Soto (Barahona) Primera Parte de la Angelica _blue morocco, rare
Granada_, 1586

No more than the first portion of this poem, which is in continuation of
the Orlando of Ariosto, ever appeared. Cervantes notices it with great
praise in his Don Quixote.

747 Jests and Jeeres, Pleasant Taunt and Merry Tales (_wants all before
B 2_), VERY RARE.

One of these Jests mentions Shakspeare by name.

1211 MARIE of EGYPT, a sacred Poeme describing the Miraculous Life and
Death of the Glorious Convert of, in verse. _rare, russia, gilt edges no
date_ (1650)

1212 MARKHAM (Robert), THE DESCRIPTION OF THAT EVER TO BE FAMED KNIGHT
SIR JOHN BURGH, _fine copy, with port. by Cecill_ 1628

A POEM OF GREAT RARITY: the Bindley copy, afterwards Mr. Heber's, sold
for £15.

1345 SHAKESPEARE (W.), COMEDIES, HISTORIES, AND TRAGEDIES, FIRST
EDITION, _wanting the title and four leaves at the end, soiled_ folio,
1623

1451 Polimantcia, or the Means Lawfull and Unlawfull to judge of the
Commonwealth, _rare_ 4to. 1595

Notice is made of Shakespeare (R 2), Spenser, Sir D. Lyndsay, Harvey,
Nash, &c.

1606 SCOTLAND:--A VERY CURIOUS AND RARE SERIES OF LATIN POEMS (BY
ALEXANDER JULIUS) on the Marriage or Deaths of some Scottish Nobles, as
the Marchioness of Huntley, _Edin._ 1607--Countess of Argyle, _ib._
1607--Earl Keith, _ib._ 1609--Earl of Montrose, _ib._ 1609--Prince
Henry, _ib._ 1612--Fredericke Prince Palatine, _ib._ 1614--Earl of
Lothian; with the author's Sylvarum liber, 1614

Of these rare poetical pieces four are unnoticed by Lowndes; five of
them are published anonymously; but their similarity to those with an
author's name testifies the source from which the others emanated.

The collection contains a good deal of early Dutch poetry, well
deserving attention for the lights which we are sure may be thrown from
it upon our own early national literature.

Miller, of 43. Chandos Street, has issued his December Catalogue,
comprising, among other articles, "Books on Freemasonry, Poetry, and he
Drama, Histories of Ireland and Irish Antiquities," which he states to
be "mostly in excellent condition and good binding," and, he might have
added, "at reasonable prices."

       *       *       *       *       * {95}

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of List in No. 5._)

DIBDIN's TYPOGRAPHICAL ANTIQUITIES. Vol. II.

CATALOGUE OF LIBRARY OF JOHN HOLME. Vol. IV. 1830 or 1833. In boards.

PINDAR, BY ABRAHAM MOORE, Part II, Boards. Uncut.

A TRACT, or SERMON, BY WM. STEPHENS, Fellow of Exeter Collegeand Vicar
of Bampton, "THE SEVERAL HETERODOX HYPOTHESES CONCERNING BOTH THE
PERSONS AND THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE GODHEAD, JUSTLY CHARGEABLE WITH MORE
INCONSISTENCIES THAN THOSE IMPUTED TO THE ORTHODOX," &c. Printed about
1719 or later.

[WHEATLEY'S] CHRISTIAN EXCEPTIONS TO THE PLAIN ACCOUNT OF THE LORD'S
SUPPER. 1737.

THE APPENDIX TO DR. RICH. WARREN'S AURORA. 1737.

THE APPENDIX TO HOADLEY'S PLAIN ACCOUNT OF THE SACRAMENT.

W.G. BROUGHTON's SECOND REPLY TO AUTHOR OF PALÆOROMAICA.

BRITISH CRITIC for January, February, April, 1823. Uncut.

DR. JOHN EDWARDS' REMARKS AND REFLECTIONS (_not_ his SOME BRIEF CRITICAL
REMARKS, 1714) ON DR. CLARKE's SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE.

SPECTATOR, Vol. IV. of the edition in 6 vols. small 8vo., 1826, with
Preface by Lynam.

EVANS' OLD BALLADS. Vol. III. 1784.

HOLCROFT's LAVATER. Vol. I. 1789.

EDMONDSON'S HERALDRY. Vol. II. 1780.

FIELDING'S WORKS. Vol. XI. 1808. The 14 vol. Bookseller's edition.

SWIFT'S WORKS. Vol I. of Edition published by Falconar, Dublin. 1763.

ROLLIN'S ANCIENT HISTORY. Vol. I. of 2nd edition in 10 vols. Knapton.
1739.

Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. BELL, publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS

_The matter is so generally understood with regard to the management of
periodical works, that it is hardly necessary for the Editor to say
that_ HE CANNOT UNDERTAKE TO RETURN MANUSCRIPTS; _but on one point he
wishes to offer a few words of explanation to his correspondents in
general, and particularly to those who do not enable him to communicate
with them except in print. They will see, on a very little reflection,
that it is plainly his interest to take all he can get, and make the
most, and the best of everything; and therefore he begs them to take for
granted that their communications are received, and appreciated, even if
our succeeding Numbers bear no proof of it. He is convinced that the
want of specific acknowledgment will only be felt by those who have no
idea of the labour and difficulty attendant on the hurried management of
such a work, and of the impossibility of sometimes giving an
explanation, when there really is one which would quite satisfy the
writer, for the delay or non-insertion of his communication.
Correspondents in such cases have no reason, and if they understoood an
editor's position they would feel that they have no right, to consider
themselves undervalued; but nothing short of personal experience in
editorship would explain to them the perplexities and evil consequences
arising from an opposite course._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.--_Naso.--J.I.--W. Robson.--I.F.M.--I.S.--
Laicus.--[Omega.]--Marianne.--Q.D.--G.H.B.--J.B.Yates--W.J.B.R--H.C.de
St. C.--B.--F.E.--Rev. L.B. Larking (with many thanks).--I.P.L.
(Oxford).--A.D.M--W.H.--C.--T.H.T.--L.C.R--I.F.M._

_V. who is thanked for his letter, will see by a Note in a former part,
that the work of Walter Mapes referred to by the Rev. L.B. Larking, is
on the eve of publication by the Camden Society. Mr. Larking's query
refers to the transcripts of that and other works made by Twysden._

_Articles on "Cold Harbour" and "Parallel Passages in the Poets," in an
early number._

MELANION _has our best thanks. The Stamp Office affix the stamp at the
corner of the paper most convenient for stamping. The last page falling
in the centre of the sheet prevents the stamp being affixed to it in
that certainly more desireable place._

_We have received many complaints of a difficulty in procuring our
paper. Every Bookseller and Newsvender will supply it_ if ordered, _and
gentlemen residing in the country may be supplied regularly with the
Stamped Edition by giving their orders direct to the publisher_, Mr.
GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street, _accompanied by a Post Office order for
a quarter (4s 4d). All communications should be addressed_ To the Editor
of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

_A neat Case for holding One Year's Numbers (52) of_ NOTES AND QUERIES
_will be ready next week, and may be had_, by Order, _of all
Booksellers._

       *       *       *       *       *

CURIOUS AND RARE BOOKS. Just published, a small Catalogue of old Books:
will be forwarded on receipt of a postage stamp; or various Catalogues
containing numerous Works on the Occult Sciences, Facetiæ, &c. may be
had on application, or by forwarding six postage stamps, to G. BUMSTEAD,
205. High Holborn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, Gratis, Postage a single Stamp.

A CATALOGUE OF SOME BOOKS from the Sale at BROCKLEY HALL, Somerset: also
some which formerly belonged to BROWNE WILLIS, the Antiquary, full of
his Autograph Additions, &c.; and others from Private Libraries. Now
selling by THOMAS KERSLAKE, bookseller, at No. 3. Park Street, Bristol:
the Nett Cash Price being annexed to each Lot. All warranted perfect.

N.B. These books are all different from the contents of T. Kerslake's
recently-published Large Catalogue of upwards of 8000 Lots, which may be
examined at the Public Literary Institution of almost all the cities and
principal towns of the United Kingdom, where Copies have been deposited.

Libraries and good Old Books, of all kinds and languages, bought for
Cash, or valued for Will Probate or other purposes, and no Charge made
for such Valuation when the Books are also bought by T. KERSLAKE. Good
Prices given for Black Letter Books and Manuscripts.

       *       *       *       *       * {96}

THE PUBLISHERS' CIRCULAR,

AND

GENERAL RECORD OF BRITISH AND FOREIGN LITERATURE;

CONTAINING A COMPLETE,

ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ALL NEW WORKS PUBLISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN,

AND EVERY WORK OF INTEREST PUBLISHED ABROAD.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published twice a Month.--Subscription, 8s. per Annum, stamped.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "PUBLISHERS' CIRCULAR" was established in 1837 under the Management
of a Committee of the principal Publishers of London. It contains an
Alphabetical List of every New Work and New Edition published in the
United Kingdom; together with a well-selected List of Foreign Works not
in the usual abbreviated Form, being a complete Transcript of the Title,
with the Number of Pages, Plates, Size, and Price; forming a very useful
and comprehensive Bibliographical Companion for all persons engaged in
literary pursuits.

All the principal Publishing Houses contribute their early Announcements
of New Works and their Advertisements generally.

Subscribers have also the opportunity of inserting in the regular List
of "Books Wanted" such works as are out of print, or not easily
procurable--the Publisher undertaking to communicate all replies to the
parties requiring the books, with a small advance upon the price at
which they are offered, so as to cover all expenses.

SAMPSON LOW, Publisher, 169. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now ready, Part XII., completing the Work, containing 15 Plates and
Letterpress. Large paper, folio, 12s. India paper, 20s. Royal 8vo.,
price 7s. 6d.

THE MONUMENTAL BRASSES OF ENGLAND: a Series of Engravings on Wood, with
descriptive Notices. By the Rev. CHARLES BOUTELL, M.A., Rector of
Downham Market, Norfolk. The Volume, containing 147 Plates, will be
ready on the 10th. Price, royal 8vo., cloth, 1l. 8s.; folio, cloth, 2l.
5s.; India paper, 4l. 4s.

_Subscribers are requested to complete their Sets at once, as the
Numbers will shortly be raised in price._

Also, by the same Author, royal 8vo., 15s., large paper, 21s.

MONUMENTAL BRASSES AND SLABS; an Historical and descriptive Notice of
the incised Monumental Memorials of the Middle Ages. With 200
Illustrations.

"A handsome large octavo volume, abundantly supplied with well-engraved
woodcuts and lithographic plates; a sort of Encyclopædia for ready
reference.... The whole work has a look of pains-taking completeness
highly commendable."--_Athenæum._

"One of the most beautifully got up and interesting volumes we have seen
for a long time. It gives, in the compass of one volume, an account of
the history of those beautiful monuments of former days.... The
illustrations are extremely well chosen."--_English Churchman._

A few copies only of this Work remain for sale, and, as it can never be
printed in the same form and at the same price, the remaining copies
will be charged 15s. small paper, 21s. large paper. Early application
for copies of the large paper edition is necessary.

By the same Author, to be completed in Four Parts.

CHRISTIAN MONUMENTS IN ENGLAND AND WALES; an Historical and Descriptive
Sketch of the various classes of Monumental Memorials which have been in
use in this country from about the time of the Norman Conquest.
Profusely illustrated with Wood Engravings. To be published in Four
Parts. Part I. price 7s. 6d., Part II. 2s. 6d.

Also, a well conceived and executed Work, Just published, Part II.,
containing 10 Plates, 5s. plain; 7s. 6d. coloured; to be completed in
three or four Parts.

ANTIQUARIAN GLEANINGS in the NORTH of ENGLAND; being Examples of Antique
Furniture, Plate, Church Decorations, Objects of Historical Interest,
&c. Drawn and etched by W.B. SCOTT.

"A collection of antiquarian relics, chiefly in the decorative branch of
art, preserved in the northern counties, pourtrayed by a very competent
hand.... All are drawn with that distinctness which makes them available
for the antiquarian, for the artist who is studying costume, and for the
study of decorative art."--_Spectator._

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 8, 1849.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 6. Saturday,
December 8, 1849, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 6. ***

***** This file should be named 13550-8.txt or 13550-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/5/5/13550/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
