The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Unwilling Professor, by Arthur Porges

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Unwilling Professor

Author: Arthur Porges

Illustrator: Milton Luros

Release Date: February 19, 2013 [EBook #42135]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNWILLING PROFESSOR ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, Greg Weeks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  This etext was produced from Dynamic Science Fiction January 1954.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


The "Professor" had braved great perils to reach Earth, and believed he
knew what he was up against. But he hadn't counted on the menace of
Fatty Schultz and Irv Lece.




  THE UNWILLING
  PROFESSOR

  by Arthur Porges

  (_illustrated by Milton Luros_)


On that fateful afternoon Fatty Schultz and Irv Lece had cut their last
classes, and were taking a gloomy walk together, scrambling through the
scrubby brush well behind the athletic field.

There were good reasons for their unhappiness. Fatty was failing in
Calculus II with a velocity that varied directly as the square of the
number of lectures attended. Irv's math instructor had informed _him_,
with a kind of loathing respect, that his only salvation lay in
recommencing the study of arithmetic--taking five or ten years in the
process--and then retiring to a cave for perhaps another fifteen in the
vain hope of digesting, through meditation and prayer, the
multiplication table. After that, Irv might be ready for elementary
algebra, but not, the professor hoped to a merciful God, in this
unfortunate institution of higher learning.

As a matter of fact, the whole of their fraternity, Omega Pi Upsilon
(usually referred to on campus as "Oh, P-Yu") was in the same boat
regarding almost every subject offered at Bateman College. Bateman had
courses that ranged from Aardvark Breeding to Zythum Brewing, but no
field of knowledge troubled them more than mathematics.

Hence the long face on Irv Lece. Fatty's visage also strove to elongate,
but simply wasn't built for such an accomplishment. Instead, his piggy
little eyes, ordinarily glowing with a kind of coarse good-humor, were
now smouldering with resentment.

They had just seated themselves in a small clearing, where Fatty, after
setting his calculus text on a grassy mound, began to heave rocks at it,
when there was a whistling scream, a jarring _whump_, and before their
bulging eyes a small disc lay crumpled, barely ten yards away.

A shrill creaking came from this odd craft, which looked like a
manhole-cover some eight feet in diameter and twenty inches thick. Then,
as they stared in wonder, a badly-sprung port opened crazily, and a
small rabbit flopped out. It may be stated here that the creature was
not actually a rabbit, but that any difference between the disc's pilot
and an ordinary cottontail was imperceptible to the naked eye.

For a moment the rabbit swayed drunkenly, its big eyes cloudy, then it
hopped towards Fatty, preferring, perhaps, his larger gravitational
field over Irv's. Extending one snowy paw, it squeaked: "Good afternoon,
gentlemen. Permit me to introduce myself. I am a good-will ambassador
from Venus, and by your conventions should be addressed as 'Professor.'
My name," he added a trifle pompously, "is Iglowt P. Slakmak, and I hold
degrees comparable to your PhD, LLD, and M. D." All this in a very
British accent.

Fatty gave a hoarse croak; Irv's knees knocked together.

"Come," the rabbit chirped, "chin up, fellows! There's nothing to be
afraid of. I speak English because we've been monitoring your radio
broadcasts for years. Television is a bit trickier, but we've seen a
few. And by listening to educational programs, I've learned a great deal
about terrestrial culture, which I notice is based upon cigarettes, used
cars--but never mind that, now. I must get to Washington and present
myself. A rival of mine is about to contact Mars for the first time, and
I hope to send in my report on Earth first." He peered at them
anxiously. "You do understand me, chaps, don't you? I learned the best
English from B. B. C., you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seeing that the two boys were still dumb, the rabbit, with a mighty
effort, picked up the three-pound calculus text, which was bound in a
revolting green. As he did so, a paper fluttered out, and the professor
deftly scooped it up. He studied Fatty's messy scrawlings for a moment,
then said warmly: "Ah, I observe that you chaps are beginning the study
of elementary mathematics." He shook a paw waggishly. "The limits are
wrong on this integration: they should go from pi-over-two to
pi-over-three first, instead of to zero. There's a discontinuity at
pi-over-three, and your result, that the center of gravity of this
six-inch cube is nine feet to the right, looks somewhat implausible."

At this, Fatty finally found his voice. "A discontinuity?" he gulped.
"Whassat?"

"Aw, you know," Irv rebuked him. "Old Cusp's been gassing about 'em for
days, now."

"Has he? Well, what is it, if you're so smart?"

"I don't remember," Irv said brazenly, "but at least I heard the name
before."

"At pi-over-three," the rabbit broke in with authority, "the denominator
of the integrand vanishes. To put it loosely, the function becomes
infinite."

Fatty looked at Irv; Irv gaped at Fatty. The piggy eyes lit up. "A
rabbit that knows math!" Fatty breathed.

"Knows it! He wrote the damn book--a real brain!" Irv exulted.

Once again their eyes met meaningly. "You always said," Irv remarked in
an abstracted manner, "that you could lick the guy who invented calc."

"I sure can," Fatty asserted, "but--" He paused; then with a speed
surprising in one of his bulk, his thick hands shot out, and Professor
Slakmak, the eminent Venusian savant, found himself dangling by the ears
from stubby, freckled fingers. He kicked with a vigor shockingly
undignified.

"Let me down!" he squeaked furiously. "This is outrageous. A friendly
ambassador's person is sacred among all civilized peoples; your national
President shall hear of this insult!"

Fatty looked at him, showing uneven teeth in a loose grin. "Bugs Bunny,"
he gloated, "you are now the official mascot of Omega Pi Upsilen!"

"I second the motion," Irv said, shuffling in excitement.

"We'd better hide his ship, though," Fatty cried, full of ingenious
intelligence now that nobody was grading him for it.

"It's too big, ain't it?" Irv replied doubtfully. "Simmer down you!" he
ordered the writhing professor. "We don't wanna choke you, but--" The
captive subsided, contenting himself with little quivers of indignation.

"It's awful light," Fatty muttered, shoving the damaged saucer with one
size eleven shoe. "We'll move it over here, pile a lot of brush on top,
and--"

"--Start a fire!" Irv interrupted joyously.

The professor gave a piercing squeal of protest.

"No, stupid," Fatty told him, winking. "If the prof here helps us out
this semester, we'll give him back his old disc, right?"

"Right," Irv agreed, crossing two fingers.

In fifteen minutes, even with Fatty working one-handed, the ship
vanished under a pile of stiff brush. "That's that," Irv said, taking a
deep breath. "Now--"

"We can't take him like this," Fatty remarked, swinging the professor by
his ears and giving him a shake by way of emphasis.

"Why not? We just been rabbit-hunting, that's all."

"Too risky. Even if the professor keeps quiet, some joker from another
frat might get nosy."

"He'll be quiet," Irv said grimly. "I know how to hit a rabbit on the
neck with the edge of my hand--" Here the professor began to kick
frantically, and Fatty snatched his hind legs, holding him rigid from
ears to toes.

"There's an old cardboard box back there," Fatty said. "That'll do the
trick."

A few seconds later the sullen captive was stuffed unceremoniously into
a damp, mouldy container, and the two students returned to the campus,
their hearts free from mathematical worries.

"The frat will owe us plenty for this," Fatty said darkly. "We've never
had anybody to coach us in math."

"They'll be licking our boots," Irv agreed. "But they always have, the
poor dopes!"

       *       *       *       *       *

That night the professor, poorly refreshed by some wilted carrot tops
and water, found himself in a circle of eager Omega Pi Upsilon's,
delivering a detailed lecture--mostly problem-solving--on Section 45 of
Broota's "Introduction to the Elementary Rudiments of the Differential
and Integral Calculus."

He was a good teacher, and when either his enthusiasm or expository art
faltered, Fatty revived it quickly with a sharp pinch or stinging slap.
So, although the average I. Q. of the fraternity was seventy-six, a
certain amount of mathematics get through; and it was almost midnight
before the unhappy ambassador found himself lying in a dirty, fetid
cage, formerly the residence of the fraternity parrot, who had expired
for lack of intellegent dialogue to copy. Rabbits, even Venusian ones,
cannot weep, but the professor's soul was heavy within him.

And so it went, day after day, week after week.

"I am quite amazed," Professor Cusp told a skeptical colleague towards
the end of the term, "at the remarkable way Schultz and his Oh P-Yu
bunch have improved. Their homework these last six weeks has been
excellent."

"Somebody's coaching them--or doing it outright," was the cynical reply.
"I find no improvement in their zoology."

"No, that's what I suspected at first, but it can't be true. For
example, on last week's extra credit problem--a real stinker--they
turned in over a dozen correct solutions, all different. Nobody would go
to that much trouble for the P-Yu crowd; they're about as popular on
campus as Malenkov is with the D. A. R."

Another colleague, who had been listening, demanded: "But you won't let
Fatty Schultz by, will you?"

"I'll have to," Cusp admitted. "Even though his exams are still
horrible, I give quite a bit of weight to good homework, so--"

"You swine!" the other said sourly. "Now I'll get him."

Cusp laughed. "Ah, but you're supposed to be tough; they're afraid of
you."

"They'd better be. It's a pity the biology lab has to experiment on poor
chimps while we give degrees to anthropoids like Fatty!"

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Fatty told his unwilling mascot the bad news. "I'm sorry,
Prof," he said genially. "It's only one more term, then I'll be done
with math, and you can go back to your disc. By my last course is with
old Totient, and he's rough."

"You promised!" the professor squealed angrily.

"This time I mean it, honest."

"Hey, Fatty," a fraternity brother objected, "ain't you gonna leave the
prof to our gang? Just cause _you're_ through--" He broke off in
confusion as Irv kicked his ankle, hard.

"Ignore the jerk," Lece reassured the crestfallen rabbit. "When Fatty
and I finish our math requirement, you're on your own again. Course,
you'll have to promise not to tell the President!" Over the professor's
head he winked broadly at his friends.

"I won't do it! It's a cad's trick!" The rabbit's brown eyes were bright
with rage.

Fatty pawed his soft fur with one lardy hand. "C'mon, Prof, be a sport,"
he urged, greasily affectionate. "We like you a lot. You wouldn't let us
down now."

"I--will--not--do--it! You promised--"

"You will, too!" Irv grunted. "Don't give us any backtalk. If I have to
twist your ears--"

"Use the cigarette lighter," somebody suggested, half ashamed. "He's
only bluffing again."

"I'm not," the professor said sturdily. "You can burn me, kill me, but I
won't tutor this bunch of cretins any more!"

"Where does he get those words?" a student wondered aloud. "What's a
cretin?"

"Irv," Fatty said in a sly, buttery voice, "where's that nasty pooch who
adopted the Delts last week? The one that chased the chaplain into Tom
Paine Hall. I'll bet he's a first class abbitray oundhay."

"Mac," Irv addressed a slender, dark boy, "they keep him in that shed
by the athletic field. Go and--ah borrow him, will you?" Mac left.

"What's an abbitray oundhay?" the professor quavered.

"You'll find out!" Fatty told him grimly. "Don't they teach pig-latin on
Venus?"

There was a strained silence, while some members of the group whispered
protests. But there was no open resistance. Fatty and Irv ran Omega Phi
Upsilon with an iron hand.

Then the door opened, and Mac, tugging hard at the collar of a large
dog, lurched into the room. "Here's Hotspur," he grinned, as the brute
strove to mangle the cowering professor.

Hotspur was a canine melting pot. The Spitz in his ancestry seemed to
predominate, but there were plain traces of airdale, setter--and
crowning evidence of some mis-alliance--dachshund. White teeth bared in
a slavering snarl, the dog glared at the rabbit, lunging against his
collar as Mac held hard.

But the professor had collapsed, all his courage gone. "A dog!" he
gasped in horror, and Hotspur seemed startled at the human voice
emerging from a rabbit. A thin whimper came from the professor. "Take
that monster away," he begged. "I'll do anything--anything!"

"That's better," Fatty chortled. "But we need this good ol' hound more
than the Delts do. Put him down in the basement--just in case." He eyed
the professor, who shrank into a furry, abject heap.

"My new prof, Dr. Totient, is tough," Fatty said. "Bugs Bunny here is
gonna have plenty to do. We'll clear out now and let him prepare his
assignments! See that you watch those signs," he jibed, handing out what
he had so long received. He fastened the rabbit's chain to its stout
staple in the wall. "Here." He fished an apple core from his jeans, and
tossed it at the professor, giving him an oily smirk. "Just to show
there's no hard feeling. Eat hearty!" He stumped out, followed by his
companions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gradually it grew dark, and the deserted fraternity-house was quiet.
Ravenous, the professor finally nerved himself to nibble the apple core,
which to his sensitive nostrils reeked of Fatty. He had just downed the
last noisome fragment, when there was a loud, inquisitive sniff at the
door. He grew rigid. Another sniff and the shoulder thrust of a heavy
body.

Insecurely shut, the door swung open, and a huge, white form stalked in.
The professor cringed, moaning a little, the hot alien scent of dog in
his nose, prepared to meet a terrible death.

"Ssst!" the big mongrel admonished him. "I'm a friend," he rumbled in
slow, thick English. Trotting over, he took the slender chain in his
great teeth, and threw his thirty pound body into the wrench. The staple
pulled free.

"Let's get t'hell out of here," he grunted, "while your bunch is gone."

"B-but my ship," the professor stammered, staring in bewilderment. "It's
broken down, and those two awful boys will find me before I can fix it."

"Never mind; I'll give you a lift in mine. I'm heading for Washington,
then I'll have to report back on Mars. I can drop you either place. I
just got word myself, only a few days ago, that our two planets had
finally made contact. They asked me to find out where you'd disappeared
to, but I never dreamed you were here. When I heard you talking
English--! But we'd better scoot. I've spied out this place long
enough-- I don't think it's quite representative."

They had just reached the brush behind the library, where the
professor's passionate story was completed, when Hotspur, looking back,
saw lights flash in the fraternity house windows.

"Wait here," he said cryptically. "Be right back." He sprang into the
brush, and vanished. A few moments later, the anxious professor heard
some yells of agony coming from the campus, and before long Hotspur
returned, panting.

"I know you'll get a sympathetic hearing in Washington," he gasped; "and
we Martians abhor violence, but there are times--" He rubbed one paw
against his mouth. "I didn't like the taste of Irv, but Fatty's even
worse! I hope," he added viciously, "they have to take Pasteur
treatments!"

"Me too!" Professor Slakmak agreed cheerfully. "And best of all, they'll
flunk math--but good! Where's your ship--Pal?"


       *       *       *       *       *


  Transcriber's Note

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_

  Missing punctuation has been silently supplied.

  No Changes have been made to the following:

  who had expired for lack of intellegent --
    intellegent is an old correct spelling

  mascot of Omega Pi Upsilen!" --
    not changed, in other places the spelling is Pi Upsilon!"




  Changes have been made to the following:

  Fatty and Irv ran Omega Ph Upsilon -->
    Fatty and Irv ran Omega Phi Upsilon

  missing character supplied


  "and we Martians abhor voilence -->
    "and we Martians abhor violence

  spelling error corrected





End of Project Gutenberg's The Unwilling Professor, by Arthur Porges

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNWILLING PROFESSOR ***

***** This file should be named 42135.txt or 42135.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/3/42135/

Produced by Dianna Adair, Greg Weeks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
