The Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the Five Indian Nations of
Canada, by Cadwallader Colden

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The History of the Five Indian Nations of Canada
       Part I, Part II

Author: Cadwallader Colden

Release Date: March 30, 2011 [EBook #35719]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE INDIAN NATIONS OF CANADA ***




Produced by Iona Vaughan, Ross Cooling, mcbax and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net









[Illustration: _A MAP of the Country of the Five Nations, belonging to
the Province of New York; and of the Lakes near which the Nations of Far
Indians live, with part of Canada._


_N.B. The Tuscaroras are now reckon'd a sixth Nation, & live between the
Onondagues & Oneidas; & the Necariages of Misilimakinac were received
to be the seventh Nation at Albany, May 30.th 1723; at their own
desire, 80 Men of that Nation being present besides Women & children.
The chief Trade with the far Indians is at the Onondagues rivers mouth
where they must all pass to go towards Canada._]




  THE

  H I S T O R Y

  OF THE

  FIVE Indian NATIONS

  OF

  _C A N A D A_,

  Which are dependent

  On the Province of NEW-YORK in AMERICA,

  AND

  Are the Barrier between the ENGLISH and FRENCH in that Part of the
  World.

  WITH

Accounts of their Religion, Manners, Customs, Laws, and Forms of
Government; their several Battles and Treaties with the _European_
Nations; particular Relations of their several Wars with the other
_Indians_; and a true Account of the present State of our Trade with
them.

In which are shewn

The great Advantage of their Trade and Alliance to the _British_ Nation,
and the Intrigues and Attempts of the French to engage them from us; a
Subject nearly concerning all our _American_ Plantations, and highly
meriting the Consideration of the _British_ Nation at this Juncture.

       *     *     *     *     *

_By the Honourable_ C a d w a l l a d e r  C o l d e n, _Esq_;
_One of his Majesty's Counsel, and Surveyor-General of_ New-York.

       *     *     *     *     *

To which are added,

Accounts of the several other Nations of _Indians_ in _North-America_,
their Numbers, Strength, &c. and the Treaties which have been lately
made with them. A Work highly entertaining to all, and particularly
useful to the Persons who have any Trade or Concern in that Part of
the World.

       *     *     *     *     *

  L O N D O N:

  Printed for T. Osborne, in _Gray's-Inn_. MDCCXLVII.




  TO THE HONOURABLE

  G E N E R A L

  _O G L E T H O R P E._

  _SIR,_

The _Indian_ Affairs have ever appeared to your judgment of such
Importance to the Welfare of our own People, that you have ever
carefully applied your Thoughts to them; and that with such Success,
that not only the present Generation will enjoy the Benefit of your
Care, but our latest Posterity bless your Memory for that Happiness the
Foundation of which was laid under your Care, provided that the People
here, whose Duty and Interest is chiefly concerned, do on their own
Parts second your Endeavours, towards securing the Peace, and advancing
the Prosperity of their Country.

The following Account of the _Five Indian Nations_ will shew what
dangerous Neighbours the _Indians_ have once been; what Pains a
neighbouring Colony (whose Interest is opposite to ours) has taken to
withdraw their Affections from us; and how much we ought to be on our
Guard. If we only consider the Riches which our Enemies receive from the
_Indian Trade_ (though we were under no Apprehensions from the _Indians_
themselves) it would be highly imprudent in us to suffer such People to
grow Rich and Powerful, while it is in our Power to prevent it, with
much less Charge and Trouble, than it is in theirs to accomplish their
Designs.

These Considerations alone are sufficient to make the _Indian Affairs_
deserve the most serious Thoughts of every Governor in _America_. But I
well know, besides; that your Excellency's views are not confined to the
Interest of one Country only.

The _Five Nations_ are a poor and, generally called, barbarous People,
bred under the darkest Ignorance; and yet a bright and noble Genius
shines through these black Clouds. None of the greatest _Roman_ Heroes
have discovered a greater Love to their Country, or a greater Contempt
of Death, than these people called Barbarians have done, when Liberty
came in Competition. Indeed, I think our _Indians_ have outdone the
_Romans_ in this Particular; some of the greatest of those have we know
murdered themselves to avoid Shame or Torments; but our _Indians_ have
refused to die meanly, or with but little Pain, when they thought their
Country's Honour would be at stake by it[1]; but have given their
Bodies, willingly, to the most cruel Torments of their Enemies, to shew,
as they said, that the _Five Nations_ consisted of Men, whose Courage
and Resolution could not be shaken. They greatly sully, however, those
noble virtues, by that cruel Passion, Revenge; this they think is not
only lawful, but honourable, to exert without Mercy on their Country's
Enemies, and for this only it is that they can deserve the Name of
Barbarians.

But what, alas! Sir, have we Christians done to make them better? We
have indeed Reason to be ashamed, that these Infidels, by our
Conversation and Neighbourhood, are become worse than they were before
they knew us. Instead of Virtues we have only taught them Vices, that
they were intirely free from before that Time. The narrow Views of
private Interest have occasioned this, and will occasion greater, even
publick Mischiefs, if the Governors of the People do not, like true
Patriots, exert themselves, and put a Stop to these growing Evils. If
these Practices be winked at, instead of faithful Friends, that have
manfully fought our Battles for us, the _Five Nations_ will become
faithless Thieves and Robbers, and join with every Enemy that can give
them any Hopes of Plunder.

If Care were taken to plant and cultivate in them that general
Benevolence to Mankind, which is the true first Principle of Virtue, it
would effectually eradicate those horrid Vices, occasioned by their
unbounded Revenge; and then they would no longer deserve the Name of
Barbarians, but would become a People, whose Friendship might add Honour
to the _British_ Nation.

The _Greeks_ and _Romans_, Sir, once as much Barbarians as our _Indians_
now are, deified the Heroes that first taught them those Virtues, from
whence the Grandeur of those renowned Nations wholly proceeded; a good
Man, however, will feel more real Satisfaction and Pleasure, from the
Sense of having any Way forwarded the Civilizing of a barbarous Nation,
or of having multiplied the Number of good Men, than from the fondest
Hopes of such extravagant Honours.

These Considerations, I believe, will induce you, Sir, to think a
History of the _Five Nations_ not unworthy of your Patronage; and on
these only it is that I presume to offer my best Endeavours in this, who
am, with the greatest Respect,

         _S I R,_

     _Your most obedient,_

         _and most humble Servant,_

             Cadwallader Colden.

[Footnote 1: This will appear by several Instances in the Second Part of
this History.]




  THE

  P R E F A C E

  TO THE

  F i r s t  P a r t.


_Though every one that is in the least acquainted with the Affairs of_
North-America, _knows of what Consequence the_ Indians, _commonly known to
the People of_ New-York _by the Name of the_ Five Nations, _are, both in
Peace and War; I know of no Accounts of them, published in_ English, _but
what are very imperfect, and indeed meer Translations of_ French _Authors,
who themselves know little of the Truth. This seems to throw some
Reflections on the Inhabitants of our Province, as if we wanted
Curiosity to enquire into our own Affairs, and were willing to rest
satisfied with the Accounts the_ French _give us of our own_ Indians,
_notwithstanding that the_ French _in_ Canada _are always in a different
Interest, and sometimes in open Hostility with us. This Consideration, I
hope, will justify my attempting to write an History of the_ Five
Nations _at this Time; and having had the Perusal of the Minutes of the
Commissioners for_ Indian Affairs, _I have been enabled to collect many
Materials for this History, which are not to be found any where else;
and cannot but think, that a History of this Kind will be of great Use
to all the_ British _Colonies in_ North-America, _since it may enable them
to learn Experience at the Expence of others: And if I can contribute
any Thing to so good a Purpose, I shall not think my Labour lost._

_It will be necessary for me here to say something in Excuse of two
Things in the following Performance, which, I am afraid, will naturally
be found Fault with in it. The first is, the filling up so great Part of
the Work with the Adventures of small Parties, and sometimes with those
of one single Man: And the second is, the inserting so many Speeches at
length._

_As to the first, the History of_ Indians _would be very lame, without an
Account of these private Adventures; for their warlike Expeditions are
almost always carried on by surprising each other, and their whole Art
of War consists in managing small Parties. The whole Country being one
continued Forest, gives great Advantages to those skulking Parties, and
has obliged the Christians to imitate the_ Indians _in this Method of
making War among them. And some would, doubtless, be desirous to know
the Manners and Customs of the_ Indians, _in their publick Treaties
especially, who could not be satisfied without taking Notice of several
minute Circumstances, and Things otherwise of no Consequence. We are
fond of searching into remote Antiquity, to know the Manners of our
earliest Progenitors; and, if I am not mistaken, the_ Indians _are living
Images of them._

_My Design therefore in the second was, that thereby the Genius of the_
Indians _might appear. An Historian may paint Mens Actions in lively
Colours, or in faint Shades, as he likes best, and in both Cases
preserve a perfect Likeness; but it will be a difficult Task to shew
the Wit, Judgment, Art, Simplicity, and Ignorance of the several
Parties, managing a_ Treaty, _in other Words than their own. As to my
Part, I thought myself incapable of doing it, without depriving the
judicious Observer of the Opportunity of discovering much of the_ Indian
Genius, _by my contracting or paraphrasing their Harangues, and without
committing often gross Mistakes. For, on these Occasions, a skilful
Manager often talks confusedly, and obscurely, with Design; which if an
Historian should endeavour to amend, the Reader would receive the
History in a false Light._

_The Reader will find a great Difference between some of the Speeches
here given of those made at_ Albany, _and those taken from the_ French
Authors. _Ours are genuine and truly related, as delivered by the sworn
Interpreters, of whom Truth only is required; a rough Stile, with Truth,
is preferable to Eloquence without it: This may be said in Justification
of the_ Indian _Expression, though I must own, that I suspect our
Interpreters may not have done Justice to the_ Indian _Eloquence. For the_
Indians _having but few Words, and few complex Ideas, use many Metaphors
in their Discourse, which interpreted by an unskilful Tongue, may appear
mean, and strike our Imagination faintly; but under the Pen of a skilful
Representer, might strongly move our Passions by their lively Images. I
have heard an old_ Indian Sachem _speak with much Vivacity and Elocution,
so that the Speaker pleased and moved the Auditors with the Manner of
delivering his Discourse; which however, as it afterwards came from the
Interpreter, disappointed us in our Expectations. After the Speaker had
employed a considerable Time in haranguing with much Elocution, the
Interpreter often explained the whole by one single Sentence. I believe
the Speaker, in that Time, embellished and adorned his Figures, that
they might have their full Force on the Imagination, while the
Interpreter contented himself with the Sense, in as few Words as it
could be expressed._

_He that first writes the History of Things, which are not generally
known, ought to avoid, as much as possible, to make the Evidence of the
Truth depend intirely on his own Veracity and Judgment; and for this
Reason I have related several Transactions in the Words of the
Registers, when this is once done, he that shall write afterwards, need
not act with so much Caution._

_The History of these_ Indians, _I promise myself, will give an agreeable
Amusement to many; almost every one will find something in it suited to
his own Palate; but every Line will not please every Man; on the
contrary, one will naturally approve what another condemns, as one
desires to know what another thinks not worth the Trouble of reading;
for which Reason, I think, it is better to run the Risque of being
sometimes tedious to certain Readers, than to omit any Thing that may be
useful to the World._

_I have sometimes thought, that Histories wrote with all the Delicacy of
a fine Romance, are like_ French _Dishes, more agreeable to the Palate
than the Stomach, and less wholesome than more common and coarser Diet._

_An Historian's Views must be curious and extensive, and the History of
different People and different Ages requires different Rules, and often
different Abilities to write it; I hope therefore the Reader will, from
those Considerations, receive this first Attempt of this kind, with more
than usual Allowances._

_The Inhabitants of_ New-York _have been much more concerned in the
Transactions, which followed the Year_ 1688, _than in those which preceded
it. And as it requires uncommon Courage and Resolution to engage
willingly in the Wars against a cruel and barbarous Enemy, I should be
sorry to forget any that might deserve to be remembered by their
Country, with Gratitude on that Occasion._





  A

  V O C A B U L A R Y

  OF

_Some Words and Names used by the_ French _Authors, who treat of the_
Indian Affairs, _which are different from the Names of the same People
or Places, used or understood by the_ English, _and may therefore be
useful to those who intend to read the_ French _Accounts, or compare
them with the Accounts now published._

       *     *     *     *     *

  _Names used by the_      _The same are called by the_ English,
      French.                        _or by the_ Five Nations.

  Abenaguies.                      Owenagungas, _or_ New-England
                                   Indians, _and_
                                   _are sometimes called the_ Eastern
                                   Indians.

  Algonkins.                       Adirondacks.

  Amihouis.                        Dionondadies, _or_ Tuinondadeks,
                                   _a Branch or Tribe of_
                                   _the_ Quatoghies.

  Aniez.                           Mohawks, _called likewise_ Maquas.

  Bay des Puans.                   Enitajiche.

  Chigagou.                        Caneraghik.

  Corlaer, _or_ Corlard.      Schenectady. _But the_ Five
                                     Nations _commonly call the_
                               _Governor of_ New-York _by_
                               _this Name, and often the_
                               _People of the Province of_
                               New-York _in general._

  Detroit.                     Teuchsagrondie.

  Hurons.                      Quatoghie.

  Hinois.                      Chictaghicks.

  Iroquois.                    _The_ Five Nations.

  Lac Huron.                   Caniatare, _or_ Quatoghe lake.

  Loups.                       Scahkook Indians.

  Manhattan.                   New-York City.

  Mascoutecs.                  Odislastagheks.

  Mourigan.                    Mahikander, _or_ River Indians,
                               _living on_ Hudson'_s River,_
                               _below_ Albany.

  Miamies.                     Twightwies.

  Missilimakinak.              Teiodondoraghie.

  Missisakies.                 Achsisaghecks.

  Oneyouts.                    Oneydoes.

  Ontario lac.                 Cadarackui Lake.

  Orange.                      Albany.

  Outagamies.                  Quacksies, _and_ Scunksiks.

  Outawas.                     Utawawas, _or_ Dewagunhas.

  Renards.                     Quaksies.

  Sauiteurs.                   Estiaghicks.

  Shaouonons.                  Satanas.

  Tateras.                     Toderiks.

  Terre rouge.                 Scunksik.

  Tongorias.                   Erighecks.

  Tsonontouans.                Senekas.




  THE

  C O N T E N T S.

  _The Introduction, being a short View of the
  Form of Government of the_ Five Nations, _and
  of their Laws and Customs._                                    pag. 1


  PART I. CHAP. I.

  _Of the Wars of the_ Five Nations, _with the_ Adirondacks
  _and_ Quatoghies.                                                  21

  CHAP. II.

  _The Wars and Treaties of Peace of the_ Indians
  _of the_ Five Nations _with the_ French, _from_ 1665
  _to_ 1683, _and their Affairs with_ New-York _in
  that time._                                                        31

  CHAP. III.

  _Of the Transactions of the_ Indians _of the_ Five Nations
  _with the neighbouring_ English _colonies._                        36

  CHAP. IV.

  _Mons._ De la Barre's _Expedition, and some remarkable
  Transactions in_ 1684.                                             59

  CHAP. V.

  _The_ English _attempt to trade in the Lakes, and the_
  French _attack the_ Senekas.                                       71

  CHAP. VI.

  _Colonel_ Dongan's _Advice to the_ Indians. Adario's
  _Enterprize, and_ Montreal _sacked by the_ Five
  Nations.                                                           80


  PART II. CHAP. I.

  _The State of Affairs in_ New-York _and_ Canada _at
  the Time of the_ Revolution _in_ Great-Britain.                    91

  CHAP. II.

  _A Treaty between the Agents of_ Massachusets-Bay,
  New-Plymouth, _and_ Connecticut, _and the_ Sachems
  _of the_ Five Nations _at_ Albany, _in the
  Year_ 1689.                                                       100

  CHAP. III.

  _An Account of a general Council of the_ Five Nations
  _at_ Onondaga, _to consider of the Count_ De
  Frontenac's _Message._                                            105

  CHAP. IV.

  _The_ French _surprize_ Schenectady. _The_ Mohawks
  _Speech of Condolance on that Occasion._                          113

  CHAP. V.

  _The_ Five Nations _continue the War with the_ French.
  _The_ Mohawks _encline to Peace. Their Conferences
  with the_ Governor _of_ New-York.                                 121

  CHAP. VI.

  _The_ English _attack_ Montreal _by Land, in Conjunction
  with the_ Indians, _and_ Quebeck _by Sea._                        126

  CHAP. VII.

  _The_ French, _and the_ Five Nations, _continue the
  War all Winter with various Success. The_ French
  _burn a Captain of the_ Five Nations _alive._                     131

  CHAP. VIII.

  _The_ Five Nations _treat with Capt._ Ingoldsby.                  137

  CHAP. IX.

  _The_ French _surprize, and take three_ Mohawk
  _Castles._                                                        142

  CHAP. X.

  _The Treaties and Negotiations the_ Five Nations _had
  with the_ English _and_ French _in the Years_ 1693,
  _and_ 1694.                                                       150

  CHAP. XI.

  _The War continued. The_ French _repossess themselves
  of_ Cadarackui Fort; _and find means to break off
  the Treaty between the_ Five Nations _and_ Dionondadies.          180

  CHAP. XII.

  _The Count_ De Frontenac _attacks_ Onondaga _in Person
  with the whole Force of_ Canada. _The_ Five
  Nations _continue the War with the_ French, _and
  make Peace with the_ Dionondadies.                                188

  CHAP. XIII.

  _The Conduct which the_ English _and_ French _observed
  in regard to the_ Five Nations, _immediately after
  the Peace of_ Ryswick.                                            196

  _Treaties, Charters, publick Acts_ &c. _from_ pag. 204, _to the End._

[Illustration]




  THE

  I N T R O D U C T I O N,

  BEING

_A short View of the Form of Government of the_ Five Nations, _and of
their Laws, Customs_, &c.


It is necessary to know something of the Form of Government of the
People, whose History one is about to know, and a few Words will be
sufficient to give the Reader a Conception of that of the _Five
Nations_, because it still remains under original Simplicity, and free
from those complicated Contrivances, which have become necessary to the
Nations, where Deceit and Cunning have increased as much as their
Knowledge and Wisdom.

The _Five Nations_ (as their Name denotes) consist of so many Tribes or
Nations, joined together by a League or Confederacy, like the _United
Provinces_, and without any Superiority of the one over the other. This
Union has continued so long, that the Christians know nothing of the
Original of it: The People in it are known by the _English_ under the
Names of _Mohawks, Oneydoes, Onondagas, Cayugas,_ and _Sennekas._

Each of these Nations is again divided into three Tribes or Families,
who distinguish themselves by three different Arms or Ensigns, the
_Tortoise_, the _Bear_, and the _Wolf_; and the _Sachems_, or old Men of
these Families, put this Ensign, or Mark of their Family, to every
publick Paper, when they sign it.

Each of these Nations is an absolute Republick by itself, and every
Castle in each Nation makes an independent Republick, and is govern'd in
all publick Affairs by its own _Sachems_ or old Men. The Authority of
these Rulers is gain'd by, and consists wholly in the Opinion the rest
of the Nation have of their Wisdom and Integrity. They never execute
their Resolutions by Force upon any of their People. Honour and Esteem
are their principal Rewards; as Shame, and being despised, their
Punishments. They have certain Customs, which they observe in their
publick Transactions with other Nations, and in their private Affairs
among themselves; which it is scandalous for any one among them not to
observe, and these always draw after them either publick or private
Resentment, whenever they are broke.

Their Leaders and Captains, in like Manner, obtain their Authority, by
the general Opinion of their Courage and Conduct, and lose it by a
failure in those Virtues.

Their great Men, both Sachems and Captains, are generally poorer than
the common People; for they affect to give away and distribute all the
Presents or Plunder they get in their Treaties or in War, so as to leave
nothing to themselves. There is not a Man in the Ministry of the _Five
Nations_, who has gain'd his Office, otherwise than by Merit; there is
not the least Salary, or any Sort of Profit, annexed to any Office, to
tempt the Covetous or Sordid; but, on the contrary, every unworthy
Action is unavoidably attended with the Forfeiture of their Commission;
for their Authority is only the Esteem of the People, and ceases the
Moment that Esteem is lost. Here we see the natural Origin of all Power
and Authority among a free People, and whatever artificial Power or
Sovereignty any Man may have acquired, by the Laws and Constitution of a
Country, his real Power will be ever much greater or less, in Proportion
to the Esteem the People have of him.

The _Five Nations_ think themselves by Nature superior to the rest of
Mankind, and call themselves _Ongue-honwe_; that is, Men surpassing all
others. This Opinion, which they take Care to cultivate into their
Children, gives them that Courage, which has been so terrible to all the
Nations of _North America_; and they have taken such Care to impress the
same Opinion of their People on all their Neighbours, that they, on all
Occasions, yield the most submissive Obedience to them. I have been told
by old Men in _New England_, who remembered the Time when the _Mohawks_
made War on their _Indians_, that as soon as a single _Mohawk_ was
discover'd in the Country, their _Indians_ raised a Cry from Hill to
Hill, _A Mohawk! A Mohawk!_ upon which they all fled like Sheep before
Wolves, without attempting to make the least Resistance, whatever Odds
were on their Side. The poor _New England Indians_ immediately ran to
the Christian Houses, and the _Mohawks_ often pursued them so closely,
that they entered along with them, and knocked their Brains out in the
Presence of the People of the House; but if the Family had Time to shut
the Door, they never attempted to force it, and on no Occasion did any
Injury to the Christians. All the Nations round them have, for many
Years, intirely submitted to them, and pay a yearly Tribute to them in
_Wampum_[2]; they dare neither make War nor Peace, without the Consent
of the _Mohawks_. Two old Men commonly go about every Year or two, to
receive this Tribute; and I have often had Opportunity to observe what
Anxiety the poor _Indians_ were under, while these two old Men remained
in that Part of the Country where I was. An old _Mohawk Sachem_, in a
poor Blanket and a dirty Shirt, may be seen issuing his Orders with as
arbitrary an Authority, as a _Roman_ Dictator. It is not for the Sake of
Tribute however, that they make War, but from the Notions of Glory,
which they have ever most strongly imprinted on their Minds; and the
farther they go to seek an Enemy, the greater Glory they think they
gain; there cannot, I think, be a greater or stronger Instance than
this, how much the Sentiments, impressed upon a People's Mind, conduce
to their Grandeur, or one that more verifies a Saying often to be met
with, though but too little minded, That it is in the Power of the
Rulers of a People to make them either Great or Little; for by
inculcating only the Notions of Honour and Virtue, or those of Luxury
and Riches, the People, in a little Time, will become such as their
Rulers desire. The _Five Nations_, in their Love of Liberty, and of
their Country, in their Bravery in Battle, and their Constancy in
enduring Torments, equal the Fortitude of the most renowned _Romans_. I
shall finish their general Character by what an Enemy, a _Frenchman_,
says of them, _Monsieur De la Poterie_, in his History of _North
America_.

"When we speak (says he) of the _Five Nations_ in _France_, they are
thought, by a common Mistake, to be mere Barbarians, always thirsting
after human Blood; but their true Character is very different. They are
indeed the fiercest and most formidable People in _North America_, and,
at the same Time, are as politick and judicious, as well can be
conceived; and this appears from the Management of all the Affairs which
they transact, not only with the _French_ and _English_, but likewise
with almost all the _Indian_ Nations of this vast Continent."

Their Matters of Consequence, which concern all the Nations, are
transacted in a general Meeting of the _Sachems_ of each Nation. These
Conventions are commonly held at _Onnondaga_, which is nearly the Center
of their Country; but they have fixed on _Albany_ for the Place of
treating with the _British Colonies_.

They strictly follow one Maxim, formerly used by the _Romans_ to
increase their Strength, that is, they encourage the People of other
Nations to incorporate with them; and when they have subdued any People,
after they have satiated their Revenge by some cruel Examples, they
adopt the rest of their Captives; who, if they behave well, become
equally esteemed with their own People; so that some of their Captives
have afterwards become their greatest _Sachems_ and _Captains_. The
_Tuskaroras_, after the War they had with the People of _Carolina_, fled
to the _Five Nations_, and are now incorporated with them; so that they
now properly indeed consist of six Nations, though they still retain the
old Name of the _Five Nations_ among the _English_. The _Cowetas_ also,
or _Creek-Indians_, are in the same Friendship with them.

The _Tuskaroras_, since they came under the Province of _New York_,
behave themselves well, and remain peaceable and quiet; and by this may
be seen the Advantage of using the _Indians_ well, and I believe, if
they were still better used (as there is Room enough to do it) they
would be proportionably more useful to us.

The Cruelty the _Indians_ use in their Wars, towards those that do not
or cannot resist, such as Women and Children, and to their Prisoners,
after they have them in their Power, is deservedly indeed held in
Abhorrence: But whoever reads the History of the so famed ancient
Heroes, will find them, I'm afraid, not much better in this Respect.
Does _Achilles_'s Behaviour to _Hector_'s dead Body, in _Homer_, appear
less savage? This Cruelty is also not peculiar to the _Five Nations_,
but equally practised by all other _Indians_. It is wonderful, how
Custom and Education are able to soften the most horrid Actions, even
among a polite and learned People; witness the _Carthaginians_ and
_Phoenicians_ burning their own Children alive in Sacrifice; and several
Passages in the _Jewish History_; and witness, in later Times, the
Christians burning one another alive, for God's Sake.

When any of the young Men of these Nations have a Mind to signalize
themselves, and to gain a Reputation among their Countrymen, by some
notable Enterprize against their Enemy, they at first communicate their
Design to two or three of their most intimate Friends; and if they come
into it, an Invitation is made, in their Names, to all the young Men of
the Castle, to feast on Dog's Flesh; but whether this be, because Dog's
Flesh is most agreeable to _Indian_ Palates, or whether it be as an
Emblem of Fidelity, for which the Dog is distinguished by all Nations,
that it is always used on this Occasion, I have not sufficient
Information to determine. When the Company is met, the Promoters of the
Enterprize set forth the Undertaking in the best Colours they can; they
boast of what they intend to do, and incite others to join, from the
Glory there is to be obtained; and all who eat of the Dog's Flesh,
thereby inlist themselves.

The Night before they set out, they make a grand Feast, to this all the
noted Warriors of the Nation are invited; and here they have their War
Dance, to the Beat of a Kind of a Kettle-drum. The Warriors are seated
in two Rows in the House, and each rises up in his Turn, and sings the
great Acts he has himself performed, and the Deeds of his Ancestors;
and this is always accompanied with a Kind of a Dance, or rather
Action, representing the Manner in which they were performed; and from
Time to Time, all present join in a Chorus, applauding every notable
Act. They exaggerate the Injuries they have at any Time received from
their Enemies, and extol the Glory which any of their Ancestors have
gained by their Bravery and Courage; so that they work up their spirits
to a high Degree of warlike Enthusiasm. I have sometimes persuaded some
of their young _Indians_ to act these Dances, for our Diversion, and to
shew us the Manner of them; and even, on these Occasions, they have
work'd themselves up to such a Pitch, that they have made all present
uneasy. Is it not probable, that such Designs as these have given the
first Rise to Tragedy?

They come to these Dances with their Faces painted in a frightful
Manner, as they always are when they go to War, to make themselves
terrible to their Enemies; and in this Manner the Night is spent. Next
Day they march out with much Formality, dressed in their finest Apparel,
and, in their March, observe a profound Silence. An Officer of the
regular Troops told me, that while he was Commandant of _Fort-Hunter_,
the _Mohawks_, on one of these Occasions, told him, that they expected
the usual military Honours as they passed the Garison. Accordingly he
drew out his Garison, the Men presented their Pieces as the _Indians_
passed, and the Drum beat a March; and with less Respect, the Officer
said, they would have been dissatisfied. The _Indians_ passed in a
single Row, one after another, with great Gravity and profound Silence;
and every one of them, as he passed the Officer, took his Gun from his
Shoulder, and fired into the Ground near the Officer's Foot: They
marched in this Manner three or four Miles from their Castle. The Women,
on these Occasions, always follow them with their old Clothes, and they
send back by them their Finery in which they marched from the Castle.
But before they go from this Place, where they exchange their Clothes,
they always peel a large Piece of the Bark from some great Tree; they
commonly chuse an Oak, as most lasting; upon the smooth Side of this
Wood they, with their red Paint, draw one or more Canoes, going from
Home, with the Number of Men in them padling, which go upon the
Expedition; and some Animal, as a Deer or Fox, an Emblem of the Nation
against which the Expedition is designed, is painted at the Head of the
Canoes; for they always travel in Canoes along the Rivers, which lead to
the Country against which the Expedition is designed, as far as they
can.

After the Expedition is over, they stop at the same Place in their
Return, and send to their Castle, to inform their Friends of their
Arrival; that they may be prepared to give them a solemn Reception,
suited to the Success they have had. In the mean Time, they represent on
the same, or some Tree near it, the Event of the Enterprize, and now the
Canoes are painted with their Heads turned towards the Castle; the
Number of the Enemy killed, is represented by Scalps painted black, and
the Number of Prisoners by as many Withs, (in their Painting not unlike
Pothooks) with which they usually pinion their Captives. These Trees are
the Annals, or rather Trophies of the _Five Nations_: I have seen many
of them; and by them, and their War Songs, they preserve the History of
their great Achievements. The solemn Reception of these Warriors, and
the Acclamations of Applause, which they receive at their Return, cannot
but have in the Hearers the same Effect, in raising an Emulation for
Glory, that a Triumph had on the old _Romans_.

After their Prisoners are secured, they never offer them the least
Male-treatment, but, on the contrary, will rather starve themselves,
than suffer them to want; and I have been always assured, that there is
not one Instance, of their offering the least Violence to the Chastity
of any Woman that was their Captive. But notwithstanding this, the poor
Prisoners afterwards undergo severe Punishments before they receive the
last Doom of Life or Death. The Warriors think it for their Glory, to
lead them through all the Villages of the Nations subject to them, which
lie near the Road; and these, to shew their Affection to the _Five
Nations_, and their Abhorrence of their Enemies, draw up in two Lines,
through which the poor Prisoners, stark naked, must run the Gauntlet;
and on this Occasion, it is always observed, the Women are much more
cruel than the Men. The Prisoners meet with the same sad Reception when
they reach their Journey's End; and after this, they are presented to
those that have lost any Relation in that or any former Enterprize. If
the Captives be accepted, there is an End to their Sorrow from that
Moment; they are dressed as fine as they can make them; they are
absolutely free (except to return to their own Country) and enjoy all
the Privileges the Person had, in whose Place they are accepted; but if
otherwise they die in Torments, to satiate the Revenge of those that
refuse them.

If a young Man or Boy be received in Place of a Husband that was killed,
all the Children of the Deceased call that Boy Father; so that one may
sometimes hear a Man of thirty say, that such a Boy of fifteen or twenty
is his Father.

Their Castles are generally a Square surrounded with Palisadoes, without
any Bastions or Out-works; for, since the general Peace, their Villages
lie all open.

Their only Instruments of War are Musquets, Hatchets, and long sharp
pointed Knives; these they always carry about with them: Their Hatchet,
in War-time, is stuck in their Girdle behind them; and besides what Use
they make of this Weapon in their Hand, they have a dexterous Way of
throwing it, which I have seen them often practise in their Exercise,
by throwing it into a Tree at a Distance: They have, in this, the Art of
directing and regulating the Motion, so that though the Hatchet turns
round as it flies, the Edge always sticks in the Tree, and near the
Place at which they aim it. The Use of Bows and Arrows are now intirely
laid aside, except among the Boys, who are still very dexterous in
killing Fowls and other Animals with them.

They use neither Drum nor Trumpet, nor any Kind of musical Instrument in
their Wars; their Throats serve them on all Occasions, where such are
necessary. Many of them have a surprising Faculty of raising their
Voice, not only in inarticulate Sounds, but likewise to make their Words
understood at a great Distance; and we find the same was practised by
_Homer_'s Heroes,

  _Thrice to its Pitch his lofty Voice he rears,----
  O Friend!_ Ulysses _Shouts invade my Ears._

The _Five Nations_ have such absolute Notions of Liberty, that they
allow of no Kind of Superiority of one over another, and banish all
Servitude from their Territories. They never make any Prisoner a Slave;
but it is customary among them to make a Compliment of Naturalization
into the _Five Nations_; and, considering how highly they value
themselves above all others, this must be no small Compliment. This is
not done by any general Act of the Nation, but every single Person has a
Right to do it, by a Kind of Adoption. The first Time I was among the
_Mohawks_, I had this Compliment from one of their old _Sachems_, which
he did, by giving me his own Name, _Cayenderongue_. He had been a
notable Warrior; and he told me, that now I had a Right to assume to
myself all the Acts of Valour he had performed, and that now my Name
would echo from Hill to Hill all over the _Five Nations_. As for my
Part, I thought no more of it at that Time, than as an Artifice to draw
a Belly full of strong Liquor from me, for himself and his Companions;
but when about ten or twelve Years afterwards, my Business led me again
among them, I directed the Interpreter to say something from me to the
_Sachems_; he was for some Time at a Loss to understand their Answer,
till he had asked me whether I had any Name among them: I then found
that I was really known to them by that Name, and that the old _Sachem_,
from the Time he had given me his Name, had assumed another to himself.
I was adopted, at that Time, into the Tribe of the _Bear_, and, for that
Reason, I often afterwards had the kind Compliment of _Brother Bear_.

The Hospitality of these _Indians_ is no less remarkable, than their
other Virtues; as soon as any Stranger comes, they are sure to offer him
Victuals. If there be several in Company, and come from a-far, one of
their best Houses is cleaned and given up for their Entertainment. Their
Complaisance, on these Occasions, goes even farther than Christian
Civility allows of, as they have no other Rule for it, than the
furnishing their Guest with every Thing they think will be agreeable to
him; for this Reason, some of their prettiest Girls are always ordered
to wash themselves, and dress in their best Apparel, in Order to be
presented to the Stranger, for his Choice; and the young Lady, who has
the Honour to be preferred on these Occasions, performs all the Duties
of a fond Wife, during the Stranger's Stay: But this last Piece of
Hospitality is now either laid aside by the _Mohawks_, or, at least,
they never offer it to any Christian. This Nation indeed has laid aside
many of its ancient Customs, and so likewise have the other Nations,
with whom we are best acquainted; and have adopted many of ours; so that
it is not easy now to distinguish their original and genuine Manners,
from those which they have lately acquired; and for this Reason it is,
that they now seldom offer Victuals to Persons of any Distinction,
because they know, that their Food and Cookery is not agreeable to our
delicate Palates. Their Men value themselves, in having all Kind of Food
in equal Esteem. A _Mohawk Sachem_ told me with a Kind of Pride, That a
Man eats every Thing without Distinction, _Bears, Cats, Dogs, Snakes,
Frogs_, &c. intimating, that it is Womanish, to have any Delicacy in the
Choice of Food.

I can however give two strong Instances of the Hospitality of the
_Mohawks_, which fell under my own Observation; and which shew, that
they have the very same Notion of Hospitality, which we find in the
ancient Poets. When I was last in the _Mohawks_ Country, the _Sachems_
told me, that they had an _Englishman_ among their People, a Servant who
had run from his Master in _New York_. I immediately told them, that
they must deliver him up. No, they answered, we never serve any Man so,
who puts himself under our Protection. On this I insisted on the Injury
they did thereby to his Master; and they allowed it might be an Injury,
and replied, though we never will deliver him up, we are willing to pay
the Value of the Servant to the Master. Another Man made his Escape from
the Goal of _Albany_, where he was in Prison on an Execution for Debt;
the _Mohawks_ received him, and, as they protected him against the
Sheriff and his Officers, they not only paid the Debt for him, but gave
him Land, over and above sufficient for a good Farm, whereon he lived
when I was last there. To this it may be added, all their extraordinary
Visits are accompanied with giving and receiving Presents of some Value;
as we learn likewise from _Homer_ was the Practice in old Times.

_Polygamy_ is not usual among them; and indeed, in any Nation, where all
are on a Par, as to Riches and Power, Plurality of Wives cannot well be
introduced. As all Kind of Slavery is banished from the Countries of the
_Five Nations_, so they keep themselves free also from the Bondage of
Wedlock; and when either of the Parties becomes disgusted, they separate
without Formality or Ignominy to either, unless it be occasioned by some
scandalous Offence in one of them. And in Case of Divorce, the Children,
according to the natural Course of all Animals, follow the Mother. The
Women here bring forth their Children with as much Ease as other
Animals, and without the Help of a Midwife, and, soon after their
Delivery, return to their usual Employment. They alone also perform all
the Drudgery about their Houses, they plant their Corn, and labour it,
in every Respect, till it is brought to the Table: They likewise cut all
their Fire-wood, and bring it Home on their Backs, and in their Marches
bear the Burdens. The Men disdain all Kind of Labour, and employ
themselves alone in Hunting, as the only proper Business for Soldiers.
At Times, when it is not proper to hunt, one finds the _old Men_ in
Companies, in Conversation; the young Men at their Exercises, shooting
at Marks, throwing the Hatchet, Wrestling, or Running, and the Women all
busy at Labour in the Fields.

On these Occasions, the State of _Lacedæmon_ ever occurs to my Mind,
which that of the _Five Nations_, in many Respects, resembles; their
Laws, or Customs, being, in both, form'd to render the Minds and Bodies
of the People fit for War.

Theft is very scandalous among them; and it is necessary it should be so
among all _Indians_, since they have no Locks, but those of their Minds,
to preserve their Goods.

There is one Vice which the _Indians_ have all fallen into, since their
Acquaintance with the _Christians_, and of which they could not be
guilty before that Time, that is, Drunkenness: It is strange, how all
the _Indian_ Nations, and almost every Person among them, Male and
Female, are infatuated with the Love of strong Drink; they know no
Bounds to their Desire, while they can swallow it down, and then indeed
the greatest Man among them scarcely deserves the Name of a Brute.

They never have been taught to conquer any Passion, but by some contrary
Passion; and the Traders, with whom they chiefly converse, are so far
from giving them any Abhorrence of this Vice, that they encourage it all
they can, not only for the Profit of the Liquor they sell, but that they
may have an Opportunity to impose upon them. And this, as they chiefly
drink Spirits, has destroyed greater Numbers, than all their Wars and
Diseases put together.

The People of the _Five Nations_ are much given to _Speech-making_, ever
the natural Consequence of a perfect Republican Government: Where no
single Person has a Power to compel, the Arts of Persuasion alone must
prevail. As their best Speakers distinguish themselves in their publick
Councils and Treaties with other Nations, and thereby gain the Esteem
and Applause of their Countrymen, (the only Superiority which any one of
them has over the others) it is probable they apply themselves to this
Art, by some Kind of Study and Exercise, in a great Measure. It is
impossible for me to judge how far they excel, as I am ignorant of their
Language; but the Speakers whom I have heard, had all a great Fluency of
Words, and much more Grace in their Manner, than any Man could expect,
among a People intirely ignorant of all the liberal Arts and Sciences.

I am inform'd, that they are very nice in the Turn of their Expressions,
and that few of themselves are so far Masters of their Language, as
never to offend the Ears of their _Indian_ Auditory, by an unpolite
Expression. They have, it seems, a certain _Urbanitas_, or _Atticism_,
in their Language, of which the common Ears are ever sensible, though
only their great Speakers attain to it. They are so much given to
Speech-making, that their common Complements, to any Person they
respect, at meeting and parting, are made in Harangues.

They have some Kind of Elegancy in varying and compounding their Words,
to which, not many of themselves attain, and this principally
distinguishes their best Speakers. I have endeavoured to get some
Account of this, as a Thing that might be acceptable to the Curious;
but, as I have not met with any one Person who understands their
Language, and also knows any Thing of Grammar, or of the learned
Languages, I have not been able to attain the least Satisfaction. Their
present Minister tells me, that their Verbs are varied, but in a Manner
so different from the _Greek_ or _Latin_, that he cannot discover by
what Rule it was done; and even suspects, that every Verb has a peculiar
Mode: They have but few radical Words, but they compound their Words
without End; by this their Language becomes sufficiently copious, and
leaves Room for a good Deal of Art to please a delicate Ear. Sometimes
one Word among them includes an entire Definition of the Thing; for
Example, they call _Wine Oneharadeseboengtseragberie_, as much as to
say, a _Liquor made of the Juice of the Grape_. The Words expressing
Things lately come to their Knowledge are all Compounds: They have no
Labeals in their Language, nor can they pronounce perfectly any Word
wherein there is a Labeal; and when one endeavours to teach them to
pronounce these Words, they tell one, they think it ridiculous that they
must shut their Lips to speak. Their Language abounds with Gutturals and
strong Aspirations, these make it very sonorous and bold; and their
Speeches abound with Metaphors, after the Manner of the Eastern Nations,
as will best appear by the Speeches that I have copied.

As to what _religious Notions_ they have, it is difficult to judge of
them; because the _Indians_, that speak any _English_, and live near us,
have learned many Things of us; and it is not easy to distinguish the
Notions they had originally among themselves, from those they have
learned of the _Christians_. It is certain they have no Kind of publick
Worship, and I am told that they have no radical Word to express _God_,
but use a compound Word, signifying the Preserver, Sustainer, or Master
of the Universe; neither could I ever learn what Sentiments they have of
a future Existence. Their funeral Rites seem to be formed upon a Notion
of some Kind of Existence after Death: They make a large round Hole, in
which the Body can be placed upright, or upon its Haunches, which after
the Body is placed in it, is covered with Timber, to support the Earth
which they lay over, and thereby keep the Body free from being pressed;
they then raise the Earth in a round Hill over it. They always dress the
Corps in all its Finery, and put Wampum and other Things into the Grave
with it; and the Relations suffer not Grass or any Weed to grow on the
Grave, and frequently visit it with Lamentations: But whether these
Things be done only as Marks of Respect to the Deceased, or from a
Notion of some Kind of Existence after Death, must be left to the
Judgment of the Reader.

They are very superstitious in observing Omens and Dreams; I have
observed them shew a superstitious Awe of the Owl, and be highly
displeased with some that mimicked the Cry of that Bird in the Night. An
Officer of the regular Troops has informed me also, that while he had
the Command of the Garrison at _Oswego_, a Boy of one of the far
Westward Nations died there; the Parents made a regular Pile of split
Wood, laid the Corps upon it, and burnt it; while the Pile was burning,
they stood gravely looking on, without any Lamentation, but when it was
burnt down, they gathered up the Bones with many Tears, put them into a
Box, and carried them away with them; and this Inclination, which all
ignorant People have to Superstition and amusing Ceremonies, gives the
Popish Priests a great Advantage in recommending their Religion, beyond
what the Regularity of the Protestant Doctrine allows of.

Queen _Anne_ sent over a Missionary to reside among the _Mohawks_, and
allowed him a sufficient Subsistence from the privy Purse; she sent
Furniture for a Chappel, and a valuable set of Plate for the Communion
Table; and (if I am not mistaken) the like Furniture and Plate for each
of the other Nations, though that of the _Mohawks_ was only applied to
the Use designed. The common Prayer, or at least a considerable Part of
it, was translated also into their Language and printed; some other
Pieces were likewise translated for the Minister's Use, _viz_. An
Exposition of the Creed, Decalogue, Lord's Prayer, and Church Catechism,
and a Discourse on the Sacraments. But as that Minister was never able
to attain any tolerable Knowledge of their Language, and was naturally a
heavy Man, he had but small Success; and his Allowance failing, by the
Queen's Death, he left them. These Nations had no Teacher, from that
Time, till within these few Years, that a young Gentleman, out of pious
Zeal, went voluntarily among the _Mohawks_. He was at first intirely
ignorant of their Language, and had no Interpreter, except one of the
_Indians_, who understood a little _English_, and had, in the late
Missionary's Time, learn'd to read and write in his own Language. He
learned from him how to pronounce the Words in the Translations, which
had been made for the late Missionary's Use. He set up a School, to
teach their Children to read and write their own Language; and they made
surprizing Proficiency, considering their Master did not understand
their Language. I happened to be in the _Mohawk_ Country, and saw
several of their Performances; I was present at their Worship, where
they went through some Part of the Common Prayer with great Decency. I
was likewise present, several Times, at their private Devotions, which
some of them performed duly, Morning and Evening. I had also many
Opportunities of observing the great Regard they had for this young Man;
so far, that the Fear of his leaving them made the greatest Restraint on
them, with which he threatened them, after they had been guilty of any
Offence. Soon after that Time, this Gentleman went to _England_,
received Orders, and was sent by the Society, Missionary to _Albany_,
with Liberty to spend some Part of his Time among the _Mohawks_.

I had lately a Letter from him, dated the seventh of _December_, 1641,
in which he writes as follows:

    "Drunkenness was so common among them, that I doubt, whether
    there was one grown Person of either Sex free from it; seldom a
    Day passed, without some, and very often forty or fifty being
    drunk at a Time. But I found they were very fond of keeping me
    among them, and afraid I should leave them, which I made Use of
    to good Purpose; daily threatning them with my Departure, in
    Case they did not forsake that Vice, and frequently requiring a
    particular Promise from them singly; by which Means (through
    God's Blessing) there was a gradual Reformation; and I know not
    that I have seen above ten or twelve Persons drunk among them
    this Summer. The Women are almost all entirely reformed, and the
    Men very much. They have intirely left off Divorces, and are
    legally married. They are very constant and devout at church and
    Family Devotions. They have not been known to exercise Cruelty
    to Prisoners, and have, in a great Measure, left off going a
    fighting, which I find the most difficult, of all Things, to
    dissuade them from. They seem also persuaded of the Truths of
    Christianity. The greatest Inconveniency I labour under, is the
    Want of an Interpreter, which could I obtain, for two or three
    Years, I should hope to be tolerably Master of their Language,
    and be able to render it easier to my Successor."

This Gentleman's uncommon Zeal deserves, I think, this publick
Testimony, that it may be a Means of his receiving such Encouragement,
as may enable him to pursue the pious Purposes he has in View.

The _Mohawks_, were they civilized, may be useful to us many Ways, and,
on many Occasions, more than any of our own People can be; and this well
deserves to be considered.

There is one Custom their Men constantly observe, which I must not
forget to mention; That if they be sent with any Message, though it
demand the greatest Dispatch, or though they bring Intelligence of any
imminent Danger, they never tell it at their first Approach; but sit
down for a Minute or two, at least, in Silence, to recollect themselves,
before they speak, that they may not shew any Degree of Fear or
Surprize, by an indecent Expression. Every sudden Repartee, in a publick
Treaty, leaves with them an Impression of a light inconsiderate Mind;
but, in private Conversation, they use, and are delighted with brisk
witty Answers, as we can be. By this they shew the great Difference they
place between the Conversations of Man and Man, and of Nation and
Nation; and in this, and a thousand other Things, might well be an
Example to the _European_ Nations.

[Footnote 2: _Wampum_ is the Current Money among the _Indians:_ It is of
two Sorts, White and Purple; the White is worked out of the Inside of
the great Conques into the Form of a Bead, and perforated, to string on
Leather; the Purple is worked out of the Inside of the Muscle Shell;
they are wove as broad as one's Hand, and about two Feet long; these
they call Belts, and give and receive at their Treaties as the Seals of
Friendship; for lesser Matters a single String is given. Every Bead is
of a known Value, and a Belt of a less Number, is made to equal one of a
greater, by so many as is wanting fastened to the Belt by a String.]




  THE

  H I S T O R Y

  OF THE

  Five _INDIAN_ Nations,

  DEPENDING

  On the Province of _NEW-YORK_.

       *     *     *     *     *

  PART I.


_The History of the_ Five Nations, _from the Time the Christians first
knew any Thing of them, to that of the Revolution in_ Great-Britain.

       *     *     *     *     *


  CHAP. I.

_Of the Wars of the_ Five Nations _with the_ Adirondacks _and_
Quatoghies.


The first Settlers of _New-York_ having been little curious in inquiring
into the _Indian Affairs_, further than what related to Trade; or, at
least, having neglected to transmit their Discoveries to Posterity, it
is much more difficult to give a just History of these Nations before,
than since the Time of their being under the _Crown of England_. What we
can learn of Certainty, however, is this. The _French_ settled at
_Canada_ in the Year 1603, six Years before the _Dutch_ possessed
themselves of _New-Netherlands_, now called _New-York_, and found the
_Five Nations_ at War with the _Adirondacks_, which, they tell us, was
occasioned in the following Manner.

The _Adirondacks_ formerly lived three-hundred Miles above _Trois
Rivieres_, where now the _Utawawas_ are situated; at that Time they
employ'd themselves wholly in Hunting, and the _Five Nations_ made
planting of Corn their Business. By this Means they became useful to
each other, by exchanging Corn for Venison. The _Adirondacks_, however,
valued themselves, as delighting in a more manly Employment, and
despised the _Five Nations_, in following Business, which they thought
only fit for Women. But it once happened, that the Game failed the
_Adirondacks_, which made them desire some of the young Men of the _Five
Nations_ to assist them in Hunting. These young Men soon became much
more expert in Hunting, and able to endure Fatigues, than the
_Adirondacks_ expected or desired; in short, they became jealous of
them, and, one Night, murdered all the young Men they had with them. The
_Five Nations_ complained to the Chiefs of the _Adirondacks_, of the
Inhumanity of this Action; but they contented themselves with blaming
the Murderers, and ordered them to make some small[3] Presents to the
Relations of the murdered Persons, without being apprehensive of the
Resentment of the _Five Nations_; for they looked upon them, as Men not
capable of taking any great Revenge.

This however provoked the _Five Nations_ to that Degree, that they soon
resolved, by some Means, to be revenged; and the _Adirondacks_ being
informed of their Designs, thought to prevent them, by reducing them
with Force to their Obedience.

The _Five Nations_ then lived near where _Mont Real_ now stands; they
defended themselves at first but faintly against the vigorous Attacks of
the _Adirondacks_, and were forced to leave their own Country, and fly
to the Banks of the Lakes where they live now. As they were hitherto
Losers by the War, it obliged them to apply themselves to the Exercise
of Arms, in which they became daily more and more expert. Their
_Sachems_, in order to raise their People's Spirits, turned them against
the _Satanas_[4], a less warlike Nation, who then lived on the Banks of
the Lakes; for they found it was difficult to remove the Dread their
People had of the Valour of the _Adirondacks_. The _Five Nations_ soon
subdued the _Satanas_, and drove them out of their Country; and their
People's Courage being thus elevated, they, from this Time, not only
defended themselves bravely against the whole Force of the
_Adirondacks_, but often carried the War into the Heart of the
_Adirondacks_'s Country, and, at last, forced them to leave it, and to
fly into that Part of the Country, where _Quebeck_ is now built.

There are more Instances than one in History, of poor dispirited
Nations, that by some signal Affront or Abuse have had their Spirits so
raised, that they have not only performed notable Things on a sudden,
but, if they happened, at the same Time, to be led and governed by wise
Men, have so far kept up, and improved that Spirit, that they have
become, in a Manner, a different People. Let us examine History, and we
shall find, that the different Figure every Country has made in the
World, has been ever principally owing to the Principles which were
inculcated into, and carefully cultivated in the People. In this chiefly
consists the Art of making a Nation glorious, or the Crime of debasing
them into Servitude or Slavery. It was from the Notions of Liberty,
Honour, and Glory, and such wise and generous Principles, which the
meanest Citizen among the old _Romans_ entertained, that they became so
great and powerful, and a Terror to all Nations; as the sordid,
timorous, cunning Artifices, and the Love of Wealth and sensual
Pleasures, cultivated among the present _Romans_, has debased them now
into the meanest and least feared Nation on the Earth. The History of
the _Five Nations_ will readily shew, how far the ancient _Roman_
Principles have been cultivated among them.

Soon after this Change of the People of these Nations, the _French_
arrived at _Canada_, and settled at _Quebeck_; and they thinking it
adviseable to gain the Esteem and Friendship of the _Adirondacks_, in
whose Country they settled, _Monsieur Champlain_, the first Governor of
_Canada_, joined the _Adirondacks_ in an Expedition against the _Five
Nations_. They met a Party of two-hundred Men of the _Five Nations_ in
_Corlar's Lake_, which the _French_, on this Occasion called by
_Monsieur Champlain's_ Name, and both Sides went ashore to prepare for
Battle, which proved to the Disadvantage of the _Five Nations_. The
_French_, in short, kept themselves undiscover'd, till the Moment they
began to join Battle; and their Fire-arms surprised the _Five Nations_
so much, that they were immediately put into Confusion; for, before that
Time, they had never seen such Weapons. The Trade with the _French_,
soon after this, drew most of the neighbouring Nations to _Quebeck_, and
they all joined in the War against the _Five Nations_.

The _Adirondacks_ having their Numbers thus increased, and their
Fire-arms giving them new Confidence, proposed nothing less to
themselves, than the intire Destruction of the _Five Nations_. Upon
this, their young Warriors became fierce and insolent, and would not be
kept under any Discipline or Subjection to their Captains; but, upon all
Occasions, rashly attacked the Enemy, who were obliged to keep
themselves upon the defensive; and to make up what they wanted in Force,
by Stratagems, and a skilful Management of the War. The young Men of the
_Five Nations_ soon perceived the Advantages they gained by this
Conduct, and every Day grew more submissive to their Captains, and
diligent in executing any Enterprize.

The _Five Nations_ sent out small Parties only, who meeting with great
Numbers of the _Adirondacks_, retired before them with seeming Terror,
while the _Adirondacks_ pursued them with Fury, and without Thought,
till they were cunningly drawn into Ambuscades, where most of their Men
were killed or taken Prisoners, with little or no Loss to the _Five
Nations_.

The _Adirondacks_, by this Means, wasted away, and their boldest
Soldiers were almost intirely destroy'd, while the Number of the _Five
Nations_ were increased, by the Addition of the Prisoners, which they
took from the _Satanas_.

The wisest and best Soldiers of the _Adirondacks_, when it was too late,
now at length discovered, that they must learn the Art of War from those
Enemies that they at first despised; and now five of their Captains
endeavoured to perform by themselves singly, with Art and by Stratagem,
what they could not do by Force at the Head of their Armies; they had
however no longer any Hopes of conquering, their Thoughts were only set
on Revenge.

It is not improper to observe here, once for all, that in writing the
History of _Indians_, it is often necessary to give an Account of the
Enterprizes of single Persons, otherwise the _Indian_ Genius can never
be known, or their Manner of making War understood. An _Indian_ named
_Piskaret_ was at this Time one of the Captains of greatest Fame among
the _Adirondacks:_ This bold Man, with four other Captains, set out for
_Trois-Rivieres_ in one Canoe, each of them being provided with three
Musquets, which they loaded with two Bullets apiece, joined with a small
Chain ten Inches long; they met with five Canoes in _Sorel River_, each
having ten Men of the _Five Nations_ on Board. _Piskaret_ and his
Captains, as soon as those of the _Five Nations_ drew near, pretended to
give themselves up for lost, and sung their Death Song,[5] then suddenly
fired upon the Canoes, which they repeated with the Arms that lay ready
loaded, and tore those Birch Vessels betwixt Wind and Water. The Men of
the _Five Nations_ were so surprized, that they tumbled out of their
Canoes, and gave _Piskaret_ and his Companions the Opportunity of
knocking as many of them on the Head as they pleased, and saving the
others, to feed their Revenge, which they did, by burning them alive
with the most cruel Torments. This however was so far from glutting
_Piskaret_'s Revenge, that it seemed rather to give a keener Edge to it;
for he soon after undertook another Enterprize, in which none of his
Countrymen durst accompany him: He was well acquainted with the Country
of the _Five Nations_, and set out about the Time the Snow began to
melt, with the Precaution of putting the hinder Part of his Snow Shoes
forward, that if any should happen upon his Footsteps, they might think
he was gone the contrary Way; and, for further Security, went along the
Ridges and high Grounds, where the Snow was melted, that his Track
might be often lost; when he came near one of the Villages of the _Five
Nations_, he hid himself till Night, and then entered a Cabin, while
every Body was fast asleep, murdered the whole Family, and carried their
Scalps into his lurking Place. The next day the People of the Village
searched for the Murderer in vain. The following Night he murdered all
he found in another Cabin. The Inhabitants next Day searched likewise in
vain for the Murderer; but the third Night a Watch was kept in every
House. _Piskaret_ in the Night bundled up the Scalps he had taken the
two former Nights, to carry, as the Proof of his Victory, and then stole
privately from House to House, till at last he found an _Indian_
nodding, who was upon the Watch in one of the Houses; he knockt this
Man on the Head; but as this alarmed the rest, he was forced immediately
to fly. He was however under no great Concern from the Pursuit, being
more swift of Foot than any _Indian_ then living. He let his Pursuers
come near him from Time to Time, and then would dart from them. This he
did with Design to tire them out with the Hopes of overtaking Him. As it
began to grow dark, he hid himself, and his Pursuers stop'd to rest.
They not being apprehensive of any Danger from a single Man, soon fell
asleep, and the bold _Piskaret_ observing this, knock'd them all on the
Head, and carried away their Scalps with the rest. Such Stories as these
are told among the _Indians_, as extraordinary Instances of the Courage
and Conduct of their Captains. The _Indians_ will often travel thus
three or four Hundred Miles singly, or two or three in Company, and lurk
about their Enemy's Borders for several Weeks, in Hopes to revenge the
Death of a near Relation or dear Friend. Indeed they give themselves so
very much up to Revenge, that this Passion seems to gnaw their Souls,
and gives them no Rest till they satisfy it. It is this Delight in
Revenge, that makes all barbarous Nations cruel; and the curbing such
Passions is one of the happy Effects of being civilized.

The _Five Nations_ are so much delighted with Stratagems in War, that no
Superiority of their Forces ever make them neglect them. They amused the
_Adirondacks_ and their Allies the _Quatoghies_ (called by the _French
Hurons_) by sending to the _French_, and desiring Peace. The _French_
desired them to receive some Priests among them, in Hopes that those
prudent Fathers would, by some Art, reconcile them to their Interest,
and engage their Affections. The _Five Nations_ readily accepted the
Offer, and some _Jesuits_ went along with them: But after they had the
Jesuits in their Power, they used them only as Hostages, and thereby
obliged the _French_ to stand neuter, while they prepared to attack the
_Adirondacks_ and _Quatoghies_, and they defeated the _Quatoghies_ in a
dreadful Battle fought within two Leagues of _Quebeck_.

The _French_ own, That if the _Five Nations_ had known their Weakness at
that Time, they might have easily destroyed the whole Colony.

This Defeat, in Sight of the _French_ Settlements, struck Terror into
all their Allies, who were at that Time very numerous, because of the
Trade with the _French_, which furnished them with many the most useful
Conveniences; for before that Time the _Indians_ had no Iron Tool among
them.

The _Nipeceriniens_, who then lived on the Banks of _St. Laurence
River_, fled upon this to the Northward, believing that the extreme
Coldness of the Climate, and a barren Soil, would be the securest
Defence against the Ambition of the _Five Nations_. The Remainder of the
_Quatoghies_ fled with the _Utawawas_ Southwestward; and for the greater
Security, settled in an Island, which being further than the Name of the
_Five Nations_ had then reached, they trusted to the Distance of the
Place, and the Advantage of its Situation.

Their last Expedition having succeeded so well, the _Five Nations_ gave
out, that they intended next Winter to visit _Yonnendio_, (the Name they
give to the Governor of _Canada_;) these Visits are always made with
much Shew. Under this Pretence they gathered together 1000 or 1200 Men.
Their out Scouts met with _Piskaret_ near _Niccolet River_, and still
pretending a friendly Visit to the Governor of _Canada_, as their only
Design, he told them, that the _Adirondacks_ were divided into two
Bodies, one of which hunted on the North Side of _St. Laurence River_ at
_Wabmake_, three Leagues above _Trois Rivieres_, and the other at
_Nicolet_. As soon as they had gained this Information, they killed him,
and returned with his Head to the Army. The _Five Nations_ divided
likewise into two Bodies; they surprized the _Adirondacks_ in both
Places, and in both cut them in pieces.

Thus the most warlike and polite Nation of all the _Indians_ in _North
America_, was almost intirely destroyed by a People they at first
despised, and by a War which their Pride and Injustice brought upon
them; and we here see, that all the Advantages of Numbers, Courage and
Weapons, is not equal to good discipline in an Army.

A very few _Adirondacks_ only now remain in some Villages near
_Quebeck_, who still waste away and decay, by their drinking strong
Waters, tho' when the _French_ first settled at _Quebeck_, 1500 fighting
Men of them lived between that Place and _Sillerie_, which are only a
League distant, besides those that lived at _Saquenay, Trois Rivieres_,
and some other Places. And since this decisive Battle, the _Adirondacks_
have never been considered as of any Consequence, either in Peace or
War.

The _Quatoghies_ and _Atawawas_ now soon began to be in Want of the
_European_ Commodities, which had made them considerable among their
new Friends. In order therefore to supply themselves anew, they
returned to Trade at _Quebeck_; and by this Means the Place of their
Retreat was discovered to the _five Nations_; and they not having their
Revenge satiated, while the _Quatoghies_ had a Being, soon convinced
them, that no Extent of Country could set bounds to that Passion, when
it rages in the Hearts of the _Five Nations_, for they soon after
attack'd them in their new Settlement. The _Quatoghies_ had the good
Fortune to discover the _Five Nations_ Time enough to make their Escape,
and fled to the _Putewatemies_, who lived a Day's Journey further, where
they, and all the Neighbouring Nations, secured themselves in a large
Fort. The _Five Nations_ followed, but, being in Want of Provision, they
could not attempt a Siege, and therefore proposed a Treaty with the
_Putewatemies_, which was accepted. The _Putewatemies_ acknowledged the
_Five Nations_ as Masters of all the Nations round them, applauded their
Valour, and promised them their Friendship, and to supply them with
Provisions; they would not however trust themselves out of their Fort,
but sent out a Supply; and even this they did, only with Design to do
that by Treachery, which they durst not attempt by Force; for the
Provisions were poisoned. The Treachery was discovered however to the
_Five Nations_, by an old _Quatoghie_, who had a Son Prisoner among
them; his Affection for his Son overcoming even his Hatred to his
Country's Enemies. This Treachery highly enraged the _Five Nations_
against the _Putewatemies_, and the neighbouring People; but Famine
obliging them to retire at this Time, they divided their Armies into
Parties, the better to provide for their Subsistence, by Hunting; one of
these Parties in their Chace fell in with a Village of the
_Chicktaghicks_ (called by the _French Hinois_) and surprized the old
Men, Women and Children, when the young Men were abroad hunting; but
the young Men, upon their Return, gathering together all the rest of the
Villages, pursued this Party of the _Five Nations_, and recovered the
Prisoners.

This was the first Time that the _Five Nations_ had been seen in those
Parts, but their Name was become so terrible, that the _Chictaghicks_,
notwithstanding this Advantage, left their Country, and fled to the
Nations that lived westward, till the General Peace was settled by the
_French_, and not till on that Occasion returned to their own Country.

[Footnote 3: It is still a Custom among the _Indians_, to expiate Murder
by Presents to the Relations of the Person killed.]

[Footnote 4: They are called _Shaouonons_, by the _French_, and live now
on one of the Banks of the Misissipi.]

[Footnote 5: It is a Custom among the _Indian_ Prisoners of War, when
led to Death, to sing an Account of their own Exploits; and this they
are hardy enough to continue even in the midst of Tortures.]




  CHAP. II.


_The Wars and Treaties of Peace of the_ Indians _of the_ Five Nations
_with the_ French, _from_ 1665 _to_ 1683, _and their Affairs with_
New-York _in that Time_.


In _June_ 1665 _Monsieur De Trasi_ appointed _Vice-Roy_ of _America_ by
the _French King_, arrived at _Quebeck_, after he had visited the
_French Islands_ in the _West Indies_, and brought with him four
Companies of Foot; and in _September_ of the same Year, _Mr. Coursel_
arrived Governor General of _Canada_; he brought with him a Regiment and
several Families, with all Things necessary for establishing of a
Colony. Their Force being now thus considerably augmented, the _French_
Governor resolved to chastise the Insolence of the _Five Nations_; and
for that Purpose, in the Winter, sent out a Party against the _Mohawks_,
but these by the Cold, and their not knowing the Use of Snow Shoes,
suffered very much, without doing any Thing against the Enemy.

This Party however fell in with _Skenectady_[6], a small Town which
_Corlear_ (a considerable Man among the _Dutch_) had then newly settled.
When they appeared near _Shenectady_, they were almost dead with Cold
and Hunger; and the _Indians_, who were then in that Village, had
intirely destroyed them, if _Corlear_, (in Compassion to his fellow
Christians) had not contriv'd their Escape. He had a mighty Influence
over the _Indians_; and it is from him, and in Remembrance of his Merit,
that all Governors of _New-York_ are called _Corlear_ by the _Indians_
to this Day, tho' he himself was never Governor. He persuaded the
_Indians_, that this was a small Party of the _French_ Army come to
amuse them, that the great Body was gone directly towards their Castles,
and that it was necessary for them immediately to go in Defence of their
Wives and Children. This they believed, and readily obeyed; and as soon
as the _Indians_ were gone, he sent to the _French_, and supplied them
with Provisions and other Necessaries to carry them back. The _French_
Governor, in Order to reward so signal a Service, invited _Corlear_ to
_Canada_; but as he went through the great Lake, which lies to the
Northward of _Albany_, his Canoe was overset, and he was drowned; and
from this Accident that Lake has ever since been called _Corlear_'s
_Lake_, by the People of _New-York_. There is a Rock in this Lake, on
which the Waves dash and fly up to a great Height; when the Wind blows
hard, the _Indians_ believe, that an old _Indian_ lives under this Rock,
who has the Power of the Winds; and therefore, as they pass it in their
Voyages over, they always throw a Pipe, or some other small Present to
this old _Indian_, and pray a favourable Wind. The _English_ that pass
with them sometimes laugh at them, but they are sure to be told of
_Corlear_'s Death. Your great Countryman _Corlear_ (say they) as he
passed by this Rock, jested at our Fathers making Presents to this _Old
Indian_, and in Derision turned up his Backside, but this Affront cost
him his Life.

In the following Spring the _Vice-Roy_ and the _Governor of Canada_,
with twenty eight Companies of Foot, and all the Militia of the Colony,
marched into the Country of the _Mohawks_, with a Design to destroy this
Nation, which by their Wars not only prevented their Commerce with the
western _Indians_, but likewise often put their Colony in Danger. It
certainly was a bold Attempt, to march above 700 Miles from _Quebeck_
through vast unknown Forests. The _Mohawks_ however, on their Approach,
Men, Women, and Children, retired into the Woods, and all that the
_French_ were able to do, was to burn some Villages, and to murder some
old _Sachems_ that (like the old Roman Senators,) chose rather to dye
than to desert their Houses.

The _French_ were so conceited before, of their Superiority over the
_Indians_ in their Skill of War, and their Weapons, that they thought
they could not escape, but the little Honour or Advantage they got by
this Expedition lessened their Vanity, and made them desirous of Peace;
and the _Five Nations_ remaining fearful of the _French fire Arms_, it
was without much Difficulty concluded in the Year 1667.

The _Five Nations_ however being naturally very enterprizing and
haughty, one of their Parties some Time after met with some _French_ in
their hunting, and quarrelled with them. The _Indians_ had the
Advantage, they killed several of the _French_, and carried one Prisoner
into their own Country. _Monsieur de Coursel_ sent on this to threaten
the _Five Nations_ with War, if they did not deliver up these Murderers;
and the _Five Nations_, to shew their publick Displeasure at this Breach
of Peace, sent _Agariata_, the Captain of the Company that did the
Mischief, with forty others, to beg Pardon; but _Monsieur Coursel_ was
resolved to make an Example of _Agariata_, and ordered him to be hanged
in Sight of his Countrymen; and the _French_ think that this Severity
was a great Means of preserving the Peace till the Year 1683.

The _Dutch_, who settled in the _New Netherlands_, now called
_New-York_, in 1609, entered into an Alliance with the Five Nations,
which continued without any Breach on either Side, till the _English_
gained this Country. The _Dutch_ gained the Hearts of the _Five Nations_
by their kind Usage, and were frequently useful to the _French_, in
saving those of them that were prisoners from the Cruelty of the
_Indians_.

In 1664, _New-York_ being taken by the _English_, they likewise
immediately entered into a Friendship with the _Five Nations_, which has
continued without the least Breach to this Day; and History, I believe,
cannot give an Instance of the most Christian or most Catholick Kings
observing a Treaty so strictly, and for so long a Time as these
Barbarians, as they are called, have done.

The _English_ and _French_ (Peace being every where settled) now
endeavoured to extend their Commerce and Alliances among the _Indian
Nations_, that live to the westward of _New-York_. The _French_ however,
in their Measures, discovered always a Design of conquering and
commanding; for with this View _Mr. de Frontenac_, who had succeeded in
the Government of _Canada_, in the Year 1672, persuaded the _Five
Nations_ to allow him to build a Fort on the north Side of _Cadarackui
Lake_, under Pretence of a Store for _Merchandise_, and the Security of
his Traders, and under the same Pretence built several other Forts at
some other considerable Places far in the Country.

The _English_ and _Dutch_, on the contrary, prosecuted their Measures
only with the Arts of Peace, by sending People among the _Indians_ to
gain their Affections, and to persuade them to come to _Albany_ to
trade; but the War with the _Dutch_, which happened about this Time,
prevented even these honest Designs from having the Success they
otherwise might have had; for in the Year 1673, _New-York_ being
surprised by the _Dutch_, and restored the next Year to the _English_,
the Alterations of Government, and of Masters, obstructed very much any
Measures that could have been taken for the publick Good. Their Trade
was likewise considerably hindered by the War which the _Five Nations_
had at that Time with the River Indians[7], which forced many of those
_Indians_ to seek Shelter among the _Utawawas_, who fell under the
_French_ Government at last; however, the _English_, _Dutch_ and
_French_ having all made Peace in _Europe_, and the Government of
_New-York_ likewise having obtained a Peace between the _Five Nations_
and _Mahikandars_ or _River Indians_, both the _English_ and _French_
were at full Liberty to prosecute their Designs of extending their
Commerce among the _Indians_, which both did with very considerable
Success and Advantage to the Inhabitants of their respective Colonies.

But this Justice must be done to the _French_, that they far exceeded
the _English_ in the daring Attempts of some of their Inhabitants, in
travelling very far among unknown _Indians_, discovering new Countries,
and every where spreading the Fame of the _French_ Name and Grandeur.
The _Sieur Perot_ travelled in the Year 1667 as far as _the Fall St.
Mary_ beyond _Missilimakinak_, and having learned those _Indians_
Language, gained them over to his Country's Interest.

The Courage and Resolution of many of these Adventurers are deservedly
recorded by the _French_; but the _English_ give it another Turn, and
say it is the Barrenness and Poverty of _Canada_ that pushes the Men of
Spirit there, upon Enterprizes, that they would not have attempted, if
they had lived in the Province of _New-York_. The chief Reason, in my
Opinion, however, of the _French_ having so far succeeded beyond the
_English_ is, that the _Indian Affairs_ are the particular Care of the
Governor and other principal Officers in _Canada_, who have the greatest
Knowledge and Authority; whereas those Affairs in _New-York_ are chiefly
left to the Management of a few Traders with the _Indians_, who have no
Care for, or Skill in publick Affairs, and only mind their private
Interest.

[Footnote 6: The _French_ call this Town _Corlear_, from the Persons
Name who first settled there. It is situate on the _Mohawks_ River
sixteen Miles from _Albany_.]

[Footnote 7: The _Indians_ living on the Branches of _Hudson_'s River,
within or near the _English_ Settlements at that Time.]




  CHAP. III.

_Of the Transactions of the_ Indians _of the_ Five Nations _with the
neighbouring_ English _Colonies_.


The _Five Nations_ being now amply supplied by the _English_ with
Fire-Arms and Ammunition, give full Swing to their warlike Genius, and
soon resolved to revenge the Affronts they had at any Time received from
the _Indian_ Nations that lived at a greater Distance from them. The
nearest Nations, as they were attack'd, commonly fled to those that were
further off, and the _Five Nations_ pursued them. This, together with a
Desire they had of conquering, or Ambition of making all the Nations
round them their Tributaries, or to acknowledge the _Five Nations_ to be
so far their Masters, as to be absolutely directed by them in all
Affairs of Peace and War with their Neighbours, made them overrun great
Part of _North-America_. They carried their Arms as far South as
_Carolina_, to the Northward of _New-England_, and as far West as the
River _Mississipi_, over a vast Country, which extends twelve hundred
Miles in Length, from North to South, and about six hundred Miles in
breadth; where they intirely destroyed many Nations, of whom there are
now no Accounts remaining among the _English_.

These warlike Expeditions often proved troublesome to the Colonies of
_Virginia_ and _Maryland_; for not only the _Indians_ that were Friends
to those Colonies became Victims to the Fury of the _Five Nations_, but
the Christian Inhabitants likewise were frequently involved in the same
Calamity.

The _French_ having a long Time felt the Inconveniencies and Dangers
they were in from this restless warlike Spirit of the _Five Nations_,
made use of this Time of Peace to guard against it for the future, and
were very diligent in pursuing the most prudent Measures. They sent some
of their wisest Priests and Jesuits to reside among them, and the
Governors of _New-York_ were ordered, by the _Duke of York_, to give
these Priests all the Incouragement in their Power. The chief View of
these Priests was, to give the _Indians_ the highest Opinion of the
_French Power_ and Wisdom, and to render the _English_ as suspected and
as mean as possible in their Eyes. They waited likewise for every
Opportunity to breed a Quarrel between the _English_ and the _Indians_,
and to withdraw the _Five Nations_ from fighting with those Nations that
traded to _Canada_. For these Purposes these Priests were instrumental
in turning the Resentment of the _Five Nations_ against the _Indians_,
that were in Friendship with _Virginia_ and _Maryland_. The Governor of
_Maryland_, on the other Hand, to prevent the ill Consequences, that
might happen by Wars between Nations that were in Friendship with the
_English_, and lived in their Neighbourhood, sent _Colonel Coursey_, in
the Year 1677, to _Albany_, to increase the Friendship between
_Virginia_ and _Maryland_ on the one Part, and the _Five Nations_ on the
other; and, accordingly, both Sides gave mutual Promises at _Albany_:
But this good Understanding was soon shaken by some Parties of the
_Oneydoes_, _Onondagas_, and _Senekas_, who were out when this Treaty
was made, and were ignorant of it. One of them met with the _Susguehana
Indians_, who were in Friendship with _Maryland_, and fell upon them;
they killed four of the _Susguehanas_, and took six Prisoners. Five of
these Prisoners fell to the Share of the _Senekas_, who, as soon as they
arrived in their own Country, sent them back with Presents, to shew that
they kept their Promises with _Maryland_; but the _Oneydoes_ detained
the Prisoner they had.

Another Party, that went against the _Canagesse Indians_ (Friends of
_Virginia_) were surprised by a Troop of Horse, who killed one Man, and
took a Woman Prisoner: The _Indians_, in Revenge, killed four of the
Inhabitants, and carried away their Scalps, with six Christian
Prisoners.

The _Mohawks_, all this while, kept strictly to their Words, and
suffered none of their Men to go towards _Virginia_ and _Maryland_.

There is Reason to think that the _Dutch_, who lived about _Albany_ at
that Time, spirited up the _Indians_ against the _English_; the national
Differences, that were then recent, bred a Rancour in their Spirits.
Some _Dutchmen_ persuaded the _Oneydoes_, that the _English_ at
_New-York_ were resolved to destroy them, and put them into a terrible
Disturbance; for here the _Dutch_ and the _French_ Priests joined in the
same Measures. The Commandant at _Albany_ hearing of this, sent two
Interpreters of the _Indian_ Language, to persuade the _Oneydoes_ to
come to _Albany_, in Order to be assured of the _English_ Friendship,
and to have their Jealousy removed; which being done, _Swerise_, one of
the chief _Sachems_ of the _Oneydoes_, excused his Countrymen at
_Albany_ the fifteenth of _February_ 1678/9, by laying the Blame on the
People of _Schenectady_, who had informed not one, but several of their
People, and at several Times, that the _English_ designed to cut them
all off; and said, had they not Reason to believe the People of
_Schenectady_, who are Friends and Neighbours to the _English_? They
brought with them a Christian Woman and her Child, that had been taken
Prisoners, and restored them, praying the Governor to use his Interest
to have their People restored, that had been taken by the People of
_Virginia_; but they kept another Christian Woman and her two Children,
which they said they did only till such Time as their Prisoners should
be restored, or some _Canastoga Indians_ given in their Place.

When the _Five Nations_ make Peace with another Nation, that has taken
some of the _Five Nations_ Prisoners, if these Prisoners be dead, or
cannot be restored, they usually demand some _Indians_, in Friendship
with the _Five Nations_, in their stead; who either are adopted in Place
of their dead Friends, or restored to their own Nation; and sometimes
they desire some of their Enemies to be given to them, and even those
frequently are adopted by a Father in Place of a Son, or by a Sister in
Place of a Brother, and, most frequently, by a Wife in Place of a
Husband lost in the Wars; but if they chance not to be agreeable to the
Relations, then they are certainly made Sacrifices to their Revenge.

Governor _Andross_, being acquainted by Letter with this last Proposal
of the _Oneydoes_, required the immediate Delivery of the Christian
Prisoners, and promised to write to _Virginia_ to have the _Indian_
Prisoners sav'd. Some Presents being given to the _Oneydoes_, and they
promised to bring them in a Month's Time.

They, at the same Time, informed the Commandant at _Albany_, that eight
of their Men were then out against the People of _Virginia_; that they
knew nothing of what was now promised; and therefore, in Case they
should do any Harm, they desired that it might not be taken as a Breach
of their Promises they now made. They promised likewise to inform the
Governor of every Thing these Parties shou'd happen to do. In the last
Place they said, we shall be very sorry if any Thing should happen to
the Prisoners that we have promised to restore, lest it should create
some Jealousies of us, we hope that you will consider that they are
mortal. Accordingly, in _May_ following, the _Oneydoes_ brought the
other three Prisoners to _Albany_, and, on the Twenty-fourth of that
Month, _Swerise_, when he delivered them to the Commandant at _Albany_,
and the Commissioners for _Indian_ Affairs, said,

    "_Brethren_,

    "We are come to this Place with much Trouble, as we did last
    Winter, and renew the Request we then made, that six _Indians_
    be delivered to us in the Room of these six Christians, in Case
    our People, who are Prisoners, be dead. None of us have gone out
    against the Christians since we were last here; but we told you
    then that some were then out, who knew nothing of the Governor's
    Orders, and we desired, that if any Thing happened it might not
    be taken ill. Now thirteen of our People, who went out against
    our _Indian_ Enemies, met eighteen Men on Horseback, as far from
    any of the _English_ Plantations as _Cahnuaga_ is from _Albany_,
    they fired upon our People; our Men, being Soldiers, returned
    their Fire, and killed two Men and two Horses, and brought away
    their Scalps.

    "It would be convenient that the Governor tell the People of
    _Virginia_, not to send their Men so far from Home; for if they
    should meet our Parties in their Way against our Enemies, the
    _Cahnowas_, whom the _English_ call _Arogisti_, we cannot answer
    for the Consequences.

    "We have now observed the Governor's Orders, in bringing the
    three other Christian Prisoners; and we trust the Affair of our
    Prisoners wholly to the Governor.

    "We have now performed our Promises: But where are our
    Prisoners; or, if they be dead, the others in their Room, now
    when it is so late in the Spring? However, we will still trust
    this to the Governor."

    Then delivering the Prisoners one by one, said, "We have, we
    say, now performed our Promises, and are not ashamed. We hope
    _Corlaer_, who governs the whole Country, will likewise do that,
    of which he need not be ashamed.

    "_Corlaer_ governs the whole Land, from _New-York_ to _Albany_,
    and from thence to the _Senekas Land_; we, who are his
    Inferiors, shall faithfully keep the Chain: Let him perform his
    Promise, as we have ours, that the Chain be not broken on his
    Side, who governs the whole Country."

    Then the Commissioners gave them Presents for their kind Usage
    of the Prisoners.

    After which _Swerise_ stood up again and said; "Let _Corlaer_
    take Care, that the _Indian_ Woman, that is wanting, be
    restored, and, for those that are killed, others in their Room.
    If _Corlaer_ will not give Ear to us in this Affair, we will not
    hereafter give Ear to him in any Thing."

    Hearing afterwards, that these last Words were ill taken,
    _Swerise_, with two more of the chief _Oneydoe Sachems_, excused
    it, saying; "What we said, of not hearkening any more to
    _Corlaer_, did not proceed from the Heart, but was spoken by Way
    of Argument, to make _Corlaer_ more careful to release our
    People that are Prisoners; and you may be convinced it was so,
    when you consider that it was said after your Answer, and
    without laying down either Bever, or any Belt or Wampum, as we
    always do, when we make Propositions[8]; therefore we desire,
    that, if it be noted, it may be blotted out, and not made known
    to _Corlaer_, for we hold firmly to our Covenant, as we said in
    our Propositions."

They, at the same Time, told them, That the _Sinondowans_[9] came to
them with eight Belts, desiring them no longer to prosecute the War with
the _Virginia Indians_, but to go to War against the _Dewaganas_[10], a
Nation lying to the North-westward; and that the _Sennekas_ did desire
them to set these Christians at Liberty, and to carry them to _Albany_;
all which we promised to do.

The _Five Nations_ continuing however still to be troublesome to
_Virginia_, that Government, in _September_ following, sent Colonel
_William Kendall_, and Colonel _Southley Littleton_, to _Albany_, to
renew and confirm the Friendship between _Virginia_ and the _Five
Nations_. Colonel _Littleton_ died at _Albany_, before the _Indians_
arrived; and Colonel _Kendall_ spoke first to the _Oneydoes_, and told
them in a set Speech, "That their People had taken away and destroyed
their Goods and People, and brought some of the Women and Children of
_Virginia_ Captives into their Castles, contrary to that Faith and
Promise, and in Breach of the Peace made with Colonel _Coursey_, without
any the least Provocation, or Injury done, by the People of _Virginia_.
However, through the great Respect _Virginia_ has to their Nations, and
by the Persuasions of the Governor of _New-York_, and the Information he
has given the Government of _Virginia_, that they had quietly and
peaceably delivered to him the Prisoners taken from _Virginia_, who were
returned safely; and their excusing the same, and Inclination to live
peaceably, without injuring _Virginia_ for the future; the Government
of _Virginia_ did forgive all the Damages the _Five Nations_ have done
to the People of _Virginia_, though very great; provided that they, or
any living among them, for the future, do not offend, or molest the
People of _Virginia_, or _Indians_ living among them."

He spoke to the _Mohawks_ and _Sennekas_, separately from the
_Oneydoes_, because they had not done any Mischief, and promised them
kind and neighbourly Usage when they came to _Virginia_, and gave them
Presents; they returned the Compliment, with an Assurance of their
Friendship, and condoled Colonel _Littleton_'s Death, after the _Indian_
Manner, by a =Present of a Belt of black Wampum=, besides the Belt given,
on renewal of the Friendship.

The _Onnondagas_ did not come till _November_; on the fifth of which
Month the _Virginia_ Agent spoke to them, in the same Words he did to
the _Oneydoes_. It does not appear, by the Register of _Indian_ Affairs,
what Answer the _Oneydoes_ and _Onnondagas_ made, but it is certain they
did not observe Friendship with _Virginia_, but molested them with
reiterated Incursions of their Parties. It is observable, however, that
these two Nations, and the _Cayugas_, only had _French_ Priests among
them at that Time, and that none of the rest ever molested the
_English_; for which Reason, Colonel _Dongan_, notwithstanding the
Orders he had received from his Master, and that he himself was a
Papist, complained of the ill Offices these Priests did to the _English_
Interest, and forbid the _Five Nations_ to entertain any of them; though
the _English_ and _French_ Crowns, while he was Governor of _New-York_,
seemed to be more than ever in strict Friendship.

The _French_ had no Hopes of persuading the _Five Nations_ to break with
_New-York_ directly, but they were in Hopes, that, by the _Indian_
Parties doing frequent Mischief in _Virginia_, the Government of
_New-York_ would be forced to join, in resenting the Injury, and
thereby that Union, between the Government of _New-York_ and the _Five
Nations_, would be broke, which always obstructed, and often defeated,
the Design the _French_ had, of subjecting all _North America_ to the
Crown of _France_. For this Reason, the Governors of _New-York_ have
always, with the greatest Caution, avoided a Breach with these Nations,
on Account of the little Differences they had with the neighbouring
Colonies. These new Incursions of these two Nations were so troublesome
to the People of _Virginia_, that their Governor, the Lord _Howard of
Effingham_, thought it necessary, for their Security, to undertake a
Journey to _New-York_.

I shall give a particular Account of this Affair, which was thought of
such Consequence, that a Peer of _England_ left his Government, and
travelled four-hundred Miles, to treat with the _Five Nations_; and
shall take this Opportunity of describing some Ceremonies they use, in
making Peace.

The _Sachems_ of the _Five Nations_ being called to _Albany_, eight
_Mohawks_, three _Oneydoes_, three _Onnondagas_, and three _Cayuga
Sachems_, met his Lordship there; and, on the thirteenth of _July_,
1684, he, accompanied by two of the Council of _Virginia_, spoke to the
_Sachems_ as follows, in the Presence of Colonel _Thomas Dongan_,
Governor of _New-York_, and the Magistrates of _Albany_. The _Senekas_
being far off, were not then arrived.

    _Proposals made by the Right Honourable_ Francis _Lord_ Howard
    of Effingham, _Governor-general of his Majesty's Dominion of_
    Virginia.

    _To_

    _The_ Mohawks, Oneydoes, Onnondagas, _and_ Cayugas.

    "It is now about seven Years, said he, since you (unprovoked)
    came into _Virginia_, a Country belonging to the great King of
    _England_, and committed several Murders and Robberies, carrying
    away our Christian Women and Children Prisoners into your
    Castles. All which Injuries we designed to have revenged on you,
    but at the Desire of Sir _Edmond Andross_, then Governor-general
    of this Country, we desisted from destroying you, and sent our
    Agents, Colonel _William Kendal_, and Colonel _Southley
    Littleton_, to confirm and make sure the Peace, that Colonel
    _Coursey_ of _Maryland_ included us in, when he first treated
    with you. We find, that as you quickly forgot what you promised
    Colonel _Coursey_, so you have wilfully broke the Covenant-chain
    which you promised our Agent, Colonel _Kendal_, should be kept
    more strong and bright, if we of _Virginia_ would bury, in the
    Pit of Oblivion, the Injury then done us; which, upon Governor
    _Andross_'s Intercession, and your Submission, we were willing
    to forget: But you not at all minding the Covenant then made,
    have every Year since, come into our Country in a war-like
    Manner, under Pretence of fighting with our _Indians_, our
    Friends and Neighbours, which you ought not to have done, our
    Agent having included them likewise in the Peace. You not only
    destroyed, and took several of them Prisoners, but you have also
    killed and burnt our Christian People, destroying Corn and
    Tobacco, more than you made Use of, killed our Horses, Hogs, and
    Cattle; not to eat, but to let them lie in the Woods and stink:
    This you did, when you were not denied any Thing you said you
    wanted.

    "I must also tell you, that, under the Pretence of Friendship,
    you have come to Houses at the Heads of our Rivers (when they
    have been fortified) with a white Sheet on a Pole, and have laid
    down your Guns before the Fort; upon which, our People taking
    you for Friends, have admitted your great Men into their Forts,
    and have given them Meat and Drink, what they desired. After the
    great Men had refreshed themselves, and desiring to return, as
    they were let out of the Fort-gates, the young Men commonly
    rushed into the Fort, and plundered the Houses, taking away, and
    destroying all the Corn, Tobacco, and Bedding, and what else was
    in the Houses. When they went away, they generally also took
    several Sheep with them, and killed several Cows big with Calf,
    and left them behind them cut to Pieces, and flung about, as if
    it were in Defiance of us, and in Derision of our Friendship.
    These, and many more Injuries that you have done us, have caused
    me to raise Forces, to send to the Heads of our Rivers, to
    defend our People from these Outrages, till I came to
    _New-York_, to Colonel _Thomas Dongan_, your Governor-general,
    to desire him, as we are all one King's Subjects, to assist me
    in warring against you, to revenge the Christian Blood that you
    have shed, and to make you give full Satisfaction for all the
    Goods that you have destroyed: But by the Mediation of your
    Governor, I am now come to _Albany_ to speak with you, and to
    know the Reason of your breaking the Covenant-chain, not only
    with us and our neighbour _Indians_, but with _Maryland_, who
    are great King _Charles_'s Subjects; for our _Indians_ have
    given King _Charles_ their Land; therefore I, the Governor of
    _Virginia_, will protect them, as your Governor, under the great
    _Duke of York_ and _Albany_, will henceforth you, when the Chain
    of Friendship is made between us all.

    "Now I have let you know, that I am sensible of all the Injuries
    you have done us, and by the Desire of your Governor-general, I
    am willing to make a new Chain with you for _Virginia_,
    _Maryland_, and our _Indians_, that may be more strong and
    lasting, even to the Word's End; so that we may be Brethren, and
    great King _Charles_'s Children.

    "I propose to you, _first_, That you call out of our Countries
    of _Virginia_ and _Maryland_, all your young Men or Soldiers
    that are now there.

    "_Secondly_, That you do not hinder or molest our friendly
    _Indians_ from hunting in our Mountains, it having been their
    Country, and none of yours; they never go into your Country to
    disturb any of you.

    "_Thirdly_, Though the Damages you have done our Country be very
    great, and would require a great deal of Satisfaction, which you
    are bound to give; yet we assure you, that only by the
    Persuasions of your Governor, who is at a vast deal of Trouble
    and Charge for your Welfare, which you ever ought to
    acknowledge, I have pass'd it by and forgiven you; upon this
    Condition, that your People, nor any living among you, for the
    future, ever commit any Incursions upon our Christians or
    _Indians_ living among us, or in _Maryland_.

    "For the better Confirmation of the same, and that the Peace now
    concluded may be lasting, I propose to have two [11] Hatchets
    buried, as a final Determination of all Wars and Jarrings
    between us; one on behalf of us and our _Indians_, and the other
    for all your _Nations_ united together, that ever did us any
    Injury, or pretended to war against our _Indian_ Friends, or
    those of _Maryland_.

    "And that nothing may be wanting for Confirmation thereof (if
    you desire it) we are willing to send some of our _Indian
    Sachems_, with an Agent, next Summer, about this Time, that they
    may ratify the Covenant with you here, in this prefixed House,
    where you may see and speak together as Friends.

    "That the Covenant now made between us, in this prefixed House,
    in the Presence of your Governor, may be firmly kept and
    performed on your Parts, as it always has been on ours; and that
    you do not break any one Link of the Covenant-chain for the
    future, by your People's coming near our Plantations; when you
    march to the Southward, keep to the Feet of the Mountains, and
    do not come nigh the Heads of our Rivers, there being no
    Bever-hunting there; for we shall not for the future, though you
    lay down your Arms as Friends, ever trust you more, you have so
    often deceived us."

The next Day the _Mohawks_ answer'd first by their Speaker, saying:

    "We must, in the first Place, say something to the other three
    Nations, by Way of Reproof, for their not keeping the former
    Chain, as they ought; and therefore we desire you, great _Sachem
    of Virginia_, and you _Corlaer_, and all here present to give
    Ear, for we will conceal nothing of the Evil they have done."
    [Then turning to the other Nations.] "You have heard Yesterday
    all that has been said; as for our Parts, we are free of the
    Blame laid on us; we have always been obedient to _Corlaer_, and
    have steadily kept our Chain with _Virginia_, _Maryland_, and
    _Boston_; but ye are stupid and brutish, and have no
    Understanding, we must stamp Understanding into you. Let the new
    Chain made Yesterday be carefully preserved for the future. This
    we earnestly recommend to you, for we are ready to cry for Shame
    of you; let us be no more ashamed on your Account, but be
    obedient, and =take this Belt=, to keep what we say in your
    Memory.

    "Hear now, now is the Time to hearken; the Covenant-chain had
    very near slipt, by your not keeping it firmly. Hold it fast
    now, when all former Evils are buried in the Pit.

    "You _Oneydoes_, I speak to you as Children; be no longer
    childish, or void of Understanding.

    "You _Onondagas_, our Brethren, you are like deaf People, that
    cannot hear, your Senses are covered with Dirt and Filth.

    "You _Cayugas_, do not return into your former Ways. There are
    three Things we must all observe.

    "_First_, The Covenant with _Corlear_. _Secondly_, the Covenant
    with _Virginia_ and _Maryland_. _Thirdly_, with _Boston_. We
    must stamp Understanding into you, that you may be obedient; and
    =take this Belt= for a Remembrancer."

Then _Cadianne_, the same _Mohawk_ Speaker, turning to my Lord, said:

    "We are very thankful to you, great _Sachem_ of _Virginia_, that
    you are persuaded by _Corlear_, our Governor, to forgive all
    former Faults. We are very glad to hear you, and see your Heart
    softened. =Take these three Bevers= as a Token.

    "We thank the great _Sachem_ of _Virginia_ for saying, that the
    Axe shall be thrown into the Pit. =Take these two Bevers=, as a
    Token of our Joy and Thankfulness.

    "We are glad that _Assarigoa_[12] will bury in the Pit what is
    past. Let the Earth be trod hard over it; or rather, let a
    strong Stream run under the Pit, to wash the Evil away out of
    our Sight and Remembrance, and that it may never be digged up
    again.

    "_Assarigoa_, you are a Man of Knowledge and Understanding, thus
    to keep the Covenant-chain bright as Silver; and now again to
    renew it, and make it stronger. (Then pointing to the three
    other Nations, said,) But they are Chain-breakers. I lay down
    this as a Token, that we _Mohawks_ have preserved the Chain
    intire on our Parts. =Gives two Bevers and a Racoon.=

    "The Covenant must be kept; for the Fire of Love of _Virginia_
    and _Maryland_ burns in this Place, as well as ours, and this
    House of Peace must be kept clean. =Gives two Bevers.=

    "We now plant a Tree[13], whose Top will reach the Sun, and its
    Branches spread far abroad, so that it shall be seen afar off;
    and we shall shelter ourselves under it, and live in Peace
    without Molestation. Here he =gave two Bevers=.

    "You proposed Yesterday, that if we were desirous to see the
    _Indians_ of _Virginia_, you are willing to send some of their
    _Sachems_ next Summer, about this Time, to this Place. This
    Proposal pleases me very much, the sooner they come the better,
    that we may speak with them in this House, which is appointed
    for our speaking with our Friends; and =give two Belts= to confirm
    it.

    "You have now heard what Exhortation we have made to the other
    three Nations; we have taken the Hatchet out of their Hands; we
    now therefore pray, that both your Hatchets may likewise be
    buried in a deep Pit. =Giving two Bevers.=

    "_Assarigoa_, some of us _Mohawks_ are out against our Enemies,
    that lie afar off, they will do you no Harm, nor plunder, as the
    others do. Be kind to them, if they shall happen to come to any
    of your Plantations; give them some Tobacco and some Victuals;
    for they will neither rob nor steal, as the _Oneydoes_,
    _Onnondagas_, and _Cayugas_ have done.

    "The _Oneydoes_ particularly thank you, great _Sachem_ of
    _Virginia_, for consenting to lay down the Axe. The Hatchet is
    taken out of all their Hands. =Gives a Belt.=

    "We again thank _Assarigoa_, that he has made a new Chain. Let
    it be kept bright and clean, and held fast on all Sides; let not
    any one pull his Arm from it. We include all the _four Nations_,
    in giving this Belt.

    "We again pray _Assarigoa_, to take the _Oneydoes_ into his
    Favour, and keep the Chain strong with them; for they are our
    Children. =Gives a Belt.=

    "The _Oneydoes_ =give twenty Bevers=, as a Satisfaction for what
    they promised the Lord _Baltimore_, and desire that they may be
    discharged of that Debt."

The two Governors told them, that they would use their Endeavours with
the Lord _Baltimore_, to persuade him to forgive what remained.

Then the _Indians_ desired that the Hole might be dug, to bury the Axes,
_viz._ one in Behalf of _Virginia_ and their _Indians_, another in
Behalf of _Maryland_ and theirs, and three for the _Onnondagas_,
_Oneydoes_, and _Cayugas_. The _Mohawks_ said, there was no Need of
burying any on their Account, for the first Chain had never been broke
by them.

Then the three Nations spoke by an _Onnondaga_, called _Thanohjanihta_,
who said:

    "We thank the great _Sachem of Virginia_, that he has so readily
    forgiven and forgot the Injuries that have been done; and we,
    for our Parts, gladly catch at, and lay hold of the new Chain.
    Then each of them delivered an Axe to be buried, and =gave a
    Belt=.

    "I speak in the Name of all three Nations, and include them in
    this Chain, which we desire may be kept clean and bright like
    Silver. =Gives a Belt.=

    "We desire that the Path may be open for the _Indians_ under
    _Assarigoa_'s Protection, to come safely and freely to this
    Place, in order to confirm the Peace." =Gives six Fathom of
    Wampum.=

Then the Axes were buried in the south-east End of the Court-yard, and
the _Indians_ threw the Earth upon them; after which the Lord _Howard_
told them, since now a firm Peace is concluded, we shall hereafter
remain Friends, and _Virginia_ and _Maryland_ will send once in two or
three Years to renew it, and some of our _Sachems_ shall come, according
to your Desire, to confirm it.

Last of all the _Oneydoes_, the _Onnondagas_, and _Cayugas_, jointly
sang the Peace-song, with Demonstrations of much Joy; and thanked the
Governor of _New-York_ for his effectual Mediation with the Governor of
_Virginia_ in their Favour.

Colonel _Dungan_ had gained the Affections of the _Five Nations_, and
they esteemed him much.

They desired the _Duke of York_'s Arms to put upon their _Castles_,
which, from the Sequel of their Story, we may suppose they were told
would save them from the _French_. Colonel _Dungan_ desired them to
call Home those of their Nations that had settled in _Canada_[14]. To
which they answered, _Corlear_ keeps a Correspondence and Friendship
with _Canada_, and therefore he can prevail more than we can. Let
_Corlear_ use his Endeavours to draw our _Indians_ Home to their own
Country.

The Government of the _Massachusets Bay_ had appointed Colonel
_Stephanus Cortland_, one of the Council of _New-York_, their Agent at
this Time, to renew their Friendship likewise with the _Five Nations_,
and to give them some small Presents; which was accordingly done.

The Governor of _New-York_, Colonel _Dungan_, concluded with this Advice
to them: Keep a good Understanding among yourselves; if any Difference
happen, acquaint me with it, and I will compose it. Make no Agreement
with the _French_, or any other Nation, without my Knowledge and
Approbation. Then he gave the Duke's Arms to be put up at each of their
Castles, in Hopes it might deter the _French_ from attacking them, (as
they were threatened from _Canada_) by this so manifest a Declaration of
their being under the Protection of the Crown of _England_, when the two
Crowns were in the strictest Friendship; but it is probable the _French_
chose this very Time to attack them, to bring them off from that
Confidence they seemed to have in the _English_.

It may be proper, before I proceed, to insert here also a remarkable
Speech made by the _Onnondagas_ and _Cayugas_ to the two Governors, on
the second Day of _August_, _viz._

    "_Brother_ Corlear,

    "Your _Sachem_ is a great _Sachem_, and we are but a small
    People; but when the _English_ came first to _Manhatan_,[15] to
    _Aragiske_[16] and to _Yakokranagary_[17], they were then but a
    small People, and we were great. Then, because we found you a
    good People, we treated you kindly, and gave you Land; we hope
    therefore, now that you are great, and we small, you will
    protect us from the _French_. If you do not, we shall lose all
    our Hunting and Bevers: The _French_ will get all the Bevers.
    The Reason they are now angry with us is, because we carry our
    Bever to our Brethren.

    "We have put our Lands and ourselves under the Protection of the
    great _Duke of York_, the Brother of your great _Sachem_, who is
    likewise a great _Sachem_.

    "We have annexed the _Susquehana_ River, which we won with the
    Sword, to this Government; and we desire it may be a Branch of
    the great Tree that grows in this Place, the Top of which
    reaches the Sun, and its Branches shelter us from the _French_,
    and all other Nations. Our Fire burns in your Houses, and your
    Fire burns with us; we desire it may be so always. But we will
    not that any of the great _Penn_'s People settle upon the
    _Susquehana_ River, for we have no other Land to leave to our
    Children.

    "Our young Men are Soldiers, and when they are provoked, they
    are like Wolves in the Woods, as you, _Sachem_ of _Virginia_,
    very well know.

    "We have put ourselves under the great _Sachem Charles_, that
    lives on the other Side the great Lake. We =give you these two
    white dressed Deer-skins=, to send to the great _Sachem_, that he
    may write on them, and put a great red Seal to them, to confirm
    what we now do; and put the _Susquehana_ River above the Falls,
    and all the rest of our Land under the great _Duke of York_, and
    give that Land to none else. Our Brethren, his People, have been
    like Fathers to our Wives and Children, and have given us Bread
    when we were in Need of it; we will not therefore join
    ourselves, or our Land, to any other Government but this. We
    desire _Corlear_, our Governor, may send this our Proposition to
    the great _Sachem Charles_, who dwells on the other Side the
    great Lake, with this =Belt of Wampum=, and this other =smaller
    Belt= to the _Duke of York_ his Brother: And =we give you,
    _Corlear_, this Bever=, that you may send over this Proposition.

    "You great Man of _Virginia_, we let you know, that great _Penn_
    did speak to us here in _Corlear_'s House by his Agents, and
    desired to buy the _Susquehana_ River of us, but we would not
    hearken to him, for we had fastened it to this Government.

    "We desire you therefore to bear witness of what we now do, and
    that we now confirm what we have done before. Let your Friend,
    that lives on the other Side the great Lake, know this, that we
    being a free People, though united to the _English_, may give
    our Lands, and be joined to the _Sachem_ we like best. We =give
    this Bever= to remember what we say."

The _Senekas_ arrived soon after, and, on the fifth of _August_, spoke
to the Lord _Howard_ in the following Manner:

    "We have heard and understood what Mischief hath been done in
    _Virginia_; we have it as perfect as if it were upon our Fingers
    Ends. O _Corlear_! we thank you for having been our Intercessor,
    so that the Axe has not fallen upon us.

    "And you _Assarigoa_, great _Sachem of Virginia_, we thank you
    for burying all Evil in the Pit. We are informed, that the
    _Mohawks_, _Oneydoes_, _Onnondagas_, and _Cayugas_, have buried
    the Axe already; now we that live remotest off, are come to do
    the same, and to include in this Chain the _Cahnawaas_, your
    Friends. We desire therefore, that an Axe, on our Part, may be
    buried with one of _Assarigoa_'s. O _Corlear! Corlear!_ we thank
    you for laying hold of one End of the Axe; and we thank you,
    great Governor of _Virginia_, not only for throwing aside the
    Axe, but more especially for your putting all Evil from your
    Heart. Now we have a new Chain, a strong and a straight Chain,
    that cannot be broken. The Tree of Peace is planted so firmly,
    that it cannot be moved, let us on both Sides hold the Chain
    fast.

    "We understand what you said of the great _Sachem_, that lives
    on the other Side the great Water.

    "You tell us, that the _Cahnawaas_ will come hither, to
    strengthen the Chain. Let them not make any Excuse, that they
    are old and feeble, or that their Feet are sore. If the old
    _Sachems_ cannot, let the young Men come. We shall not fail to
    come hither, tho' we live farthest off, and then the new Chain
    will be stronger and brighter.

    "We understand, that because of the Mischief that has been done
    to the People and Castles of _Virginia_ and _Maryland_, we must
    not come near the Heads of your Rivers, nor near your
    Plantations, but keep at the Foot of the Mountains; for tho' we
    lay down our Arms, as Friends, we shall not be trusted for the
    future, but looked on as Robbers. We agree however to this
    Proposition, and shall wholly stay away from _Virginia_: And
    this we do in Gratitude to _Corlear_, who has been at so great
    Pains to persuade you, great Governor of _Virginia_, to forget
    what is past. You are wise in giving Ear to _Corlear_'s good
    Advice, for we shall now go a Path which was never trod before.

    "We have now done speaking to _Corlear_, and the Governor of
    _Virginia_; let the Chain be for ever kept clean and bright by
    him, and we shall do the same.

    "The other Nations from the _Mohawks_ Country to the _Cayugas_,
    have delivered up the _Susquehana_ River, and all that Country,
    to _Corlear_'s Government. We confirm what they have done by
    =giving this Belt=."

Coll. _Bird_, one of the Council of _Virginia_, and _Edmond Jennings
Esq_; Attorney General of that Province, came with four _Indian
Sachems_, (according to the Lord _Howard_'s Promise) to renew and
confirm the Peace, and met the _Five Nations_ at _Albany_ in _September_
1685.

Coll. _Bird_ accused them of having again broke their Promise, by taking
an _Indian_ Girl from an _English_ Man's House, and four _Indian_ Boys
Prisoners.

They excused this, by its being done by the Parties that were out when
the Peace was concluded, who knew nothing of it; which Accident they had
provided against in their Articles. They said, the four Boys were given
to the Relations of those Men that were lost; and it would be difficult
to obtain their Restoration: But they at last promised to deliver them
up.

The _Senakas_ and _Mohawks_ declared themselves free of any Blame, and
chid the other Nations.

So that we may still observe the Influence which the _French_ Priests
had obtained over those other Nations, and to what Christian like
Purpose they used it.

The _Mohawks_ Speaker said, "Where shall I seek the Chain of Peace?
Where shall I find it but upon our Path[18]? And whither doth our Path
lead us, but into this House? This is a House of Peace;" after this he
sang all the Links of the Chain over. He afterwards sang by Way of
Admonition to the _Onondagas_, _Oneydoes_, and _Cayugas_, and concluded
all with a Song to the _Virginia Indians_.

The _French Priests_ however still employed their Influence over the
_Onnondagas_, _Cayugas_, and _Oneydoes_; and it was easy for them to
spirit up the _Indians_ (naturally revengeful) against their old
Enemies. A Party of the _Oneydoes_ went out two Years after this against
the _Wayanoak Indians_, Friends of _Virginia_, and killed some of the
People of _Virginia_, who assisted those _Indians_. They took six
Prisoners, but restored them at _Albany_, with an Excuse, that they did
not know they were Friends of _Virginia_. But Coll. _Dungan_ on this
Occasion told them, That he only had kept all the _English_ in
_North-America_ from joining together to destroy them; that if ever he
should hear of the like Complaint, he would dig up the Hatchet, and join
with the rest of the _English_ to cut them off Root and Branch; for
there were many Complaints made of him to the King by the _English_, as
well as by the Governor of _Canada_, for his favouring of them.

We have now gone through the material Transactions which the _Five
Nations_ had with the _English_, in which we find the _English_ pursuing
nothing but peaceable and Christian-like Measures; and the _Five
Nations_ (tho' Barbarians) living with the People of _New-York_, like
good Neighbours and faithful Friends, and generally with all the
_English_ also, except when they were influenced by the _Jesuites_; at
the same Time, one cannot but admire the Zeal, Courage, and Resolution
of these Jesuites, that would adventure to live among _Indians_ at War
with their Nation; and the better to carry their Purposes, to comply
with all the Humours and Manners of such a wild People, so as not to be
distinguished by Strangers from meer _Indians_. One of them, named
_Milet_, remained with the _Oneydoes_ till after the Year 1694; he was
advanced to the Degree of a _Sachem_, and had so great an Influence over
them, that the other Nations could not prevail with them to part with
him. While he lived with them, the _Oneydoes_ were frequently turned
against the Southern _Indians_ (Friends of the _English_ southern
Colonies) and were always wavering in their Resolutions against the
_French_ at _Canada_.

We shall now see what Effect the Policy of the _French_ had, who pursued
very different Measures from the _English_.




  CHAP. IV.

_Mr_. De la Barre'_s Expedition, and some remarkable Transactions in_
1684.


The _French_, in the Time they were at Peace with the _Five Nations_,
built their Forts at _Taidonderaghi_ and _Missilimakinak_, and made a
Settlement there. They carried on their Commerce among the numerous
Nations that live on the Banks of the great Lakes, and the Banks of the
_Mississipi_; they not only prosecuted their Trade among these Nations,
but did all they could to secure their Obedience, and to make them
absolutely subject to the Crown of _France_, by building Forts at the
considerable Passes, and placing small Garisons in them. They took in
short all the Precautions in their Power, not only to restrain the
_Indians_ by Force, but likewise to gain their Affections, by sending
_Missionaries_ among them. The only Obstruction they met with was from
the _Five Nations_, who introduced the _English_ of _New-York_ into the
Lakes to trade with the _Indians_ that lived round them. This gave the
_French_ much Uneasiness, because they foresaw, that the _English_ would
not only prove dangerous Rivals, but that the Advantages which they had
in Trade, beyond what it was possible for the Inhabitants of _Canada_ to
have, would enable the People of _New-York_ so far to undersel them,
that their Trade would soon be ruined, and all the Interest lost which
they had gained with so much Labour and Expence. The _Five Nations_
likewise continued in War with many of the Nations, with the
_Chictaghicks_ particularly, who yielded the most profitable Trade to
the _French_; and as often as they discovered any of the _French_
carrying Ammunition towards these Nations, they fell upon them, and took
all their Powder, Lead and Arms from them. This made the _French_
Traders afraid of travelling, and prevented their _Indians_ from
hunting, and also lessened the Opinion they had of the _French_ Power,
when they found that the _French_ were not able to protect them against
the Insults of the _Five Nations_.

The _Senakas_ lie next to the Lakes, and nearest to the Nations with
whom the _French_ carried on the greatest Trade, these People were so
averse to that Nation, that they would never receive any Priests among
them, and of Consequence were most firmly attach'd to the _English_
Interest, who supplied them with Arms and Powder (the Means to be
revenged of their Enemies.) For these Reasons Mr. _De la Barre_
(Governor of _Canada_) sent a Messenger to Coll. _Dungan_, to complain
of the Injuries the _Senakas_ had done to the _French_, and to shew the
Necessity he was under to bring the _Five Nations_ to Reason by Force of
Arms. This Messenger happening to arrive at the Time the _Indians_ met
the Lord _Howard_ at _Albany_, Coll. _Dungan_ told the _Senakas_ the
Complaints that the _French_ Governor made of them. To which they gave
him the following Answer, in Presence of Mr. _De la Barre_'s Messenger,
on the 5th of _August_ 1684.

    "We were sent for, and are come, and have heard what you have
    said to us, that _Corlear_ hath great Complaints of us, both
    from _Virginia_ and _Canada_. What they complain of from
    _Canada_ may possibly be true, that some of our young Men have
    taken some of their Goods, but _Yonnendio_ the Governor of
    _Canada_, is the Cause of it. He not only permits his People to
    carry Ammunition, Guns, Powder, Lead, and Axes to the
    _Tuihtuih-ronoons_[19] our Enemies, but sends them thither on
    purpose. These Guns which he sends knock our Bever Hunters on
    the Head, and our Enemies carry the Bevers to _Canada_ that we
    would have brought to our Brethren. Our Bever Hunters are
    Soldiers, and could bear this no longer. They met some _French_
    in their Way to our Enemies, and very near them, carrying
    Ammunition, which our Men took from them. This is agreeable to
    our Customs in War; and we may therefore openly own it, tho' we
    know not whether it be practised by the Christians in such like
    Cases.

    "When the Governor of _Canada_ speaks to us of the Chain, he
    calls us Children, and saith, I am your Father, you must hold
    fast the Chain, and I will do the same: I will protect you as a
    Father doth his Children. Is this Protection, to speak thus with
    his Lips, and at the same Time to knock us on the Head, by
    assisting our Enemies with Ammunition?

    "He always says, I am your Father, and you are my Children; and
    yet he is angry with his Children, for taking these Goods.

    "But, O _Corlear_! O _Assarigoa_! we must complain to you; you
    _Corlear_ are a Lord, and govern this Country; is it just that
    our Father is going to fight with us for these Things, or is it
    well done? We rejoiced when _La Sal_ was sent over the great
    Water; and when _Perot_ was removed, because they had furnished
    our Enemies with Ammunition; but we are disappointed in our
    Hopes, for we find our Enemies are still supplied. Is this well
    done? Yea, he often forbids us to make War on any of the Nations
    with whom he trades; and at the same Time furnishes them with
    all Sorts of Ammunition, to enable them to destroy us.

    "Thus far in Answer to the Complaint the Governor of _Canada_
    hath made of us to _Corlear_. _Corlear_ said to us, that
    Satisfaction must be made to the _French_ for the Mischief we
    have done them. This he said before he heard our Answer. Now let
    him that hath Inspection over all our Countries, on whom our
    Eyes are fixed, let him, even _Corlear_, judge and determine. If
    you say that it must be paid, we shall pay it, but we cannot
    live without free Bever Hunting.

    "_Corlear_, hear what we say, we thank you for the Duke's Arms,
    which you have given us to be put in our Castles, as a Defence
    to them. You command them. Have we wandered out of the Way, as
    the Governor of _Canada_ says? We do not threaten him with War,
    as he threatens us. What shall we do? Shall we run away, or
    shall we sit still in our Houses? What shall we do? we speek to
    him that governs and commands us.

    "Now _Corlear_, and _Assarigoa_, and all People here present,
    remember what we have answered to the Complaints of the Governor
    of _Canada_; yea, we wish that what we here said may come to his
    Ears." Then they =gave a Belt=.

Monsieur _De la Barre_ at this Time was gone, with all the Force of
_Canada_, to _Cadarackui Fort_, and ordered the three Vessels to be
repaired which the _French_ had built on _Cadarackui Lake_: His Design
was to frighten the _Five Nations_ into his own Terms, by the Appearance
of the _French_ Army, which consisted of 600 Soldiers of the regular
Troops, 400 _Indians_, and 400 Men that carried Provisions, besides 300
Men that he left to secure _Cadarackui Fort_, and the western
_Indians_, that he expected would join him. But while he was at this
Fort, the Fatigue of travelling in the Month of _August_, together with
the Unhealthiness of that Place (the Country thereabout being very
marshy) where he tarried six Weeks, occasioned so great a Sickness in
his Army, that he found himself unable to perform any Thing but by
Treaty; and therefore sent Orders to Monsr. _Dulhut_, who was come from
_Missilimakinak_ with 600 Men, _French_ and _Indians_, to stop. Monsr.
_De la Barre_ passed across the Lake, with as many Men as were able to
travel, and arrived at the River which the _French_ call _La Famine_, by
the _Indians_ called _Kaihohage_, which falls into the South Side of
_Cadarackui Lake_, about thirty Miles from _Onnondago_. There were two
Villages of the _Five Nations_ on the North Side of the Lake, about
fifteen Miles from the _French_ Fort, consisting of those _Indians_ that
had the most Inclination to the _French_: They provided the _French_
Army with Provisions, while they remained at the Fort; but it is
probable, sent an Account to their own Nations of every Thing that
happened; and that this was the Reason of the Usage they afterwards met
with from the _French_.

When Monsr. _De la Barre_ sent to Coll. _Dungan_, he was in Hopes, from
the strict Alliance that was then between the Crowns of _England_ and
_France_, and from Coll. _Dungan_'s being a Papist, that he would at
least sit still till he had reduced the _Five Nations_. But none of
these Reasons permitted that Gentleman to be easy, while the _French_
attempted such Things, as in their Consequences would be of the highest
Degree prejudicial to the _English_ Interest, and might put all the
_English_ Colonies in _America_ in Danger. Wherefore he dispatched the
publick Interpreter, with Orders to do every Thing in his Power to
prevent the _Five Nations_ going to treat with Monsr. _De la Barre_.

The Interpreter succeeded in his Design with the _Mohawks_, and with
the _Senakas_, who promised that they would not go near the _French_
Governor: But he had not the like Success with the _Onnondagas,
Oneydoes_, and _Cayugas_, who had received the _French_ Priests, for
they would not hear the Interpreter, but in Presence of the _French_
Priests, and Monsr. _la Main_, and three other _Frenchmen_ that Monsr.
_De la Barre_ had sent to persuade them to meet him at _Kaihohage_; they
gave the following Answer to the Interpreter.

    "_Arie_, you are _Corlear's Messenger_, _Ohquesse_[20] (Monsr.
    _la Maine_) is the Governor of _Canada_'s; and there[21] sits
    our Father; _Yonnondio_ acquainted us some Time ago, that he
    would speak with us, before he would undertake any Thing against
    the _Senakas_. Now he hath sent for all the Nations to speak
    with him in Friendship, and that at a Place not far from
    _Onnondaga_, even at _Kaihohage_. But our Brother _Corlear_
    tells us, that we must not meet the Governor of _Canada_ without
    his Permission; and that if _Yonnondio_ have any Thing to say to
    us, he must first send to _Corlear_ for Leave to speak with us.
    _Yonnondio_ has sent long ago to us to speak with him, and he
    has lately repeated that Desire by _Onnissantie_ the Brother of
    our Father _Twirhaersira_[22] that sits there; he has not only
    entreated us by our Father, but by two praying _Indians_, one an
    _Onnondaga_, the other the Son of an old _Mohawk Sachem_,
    _Connondowe_. They brought five great Belts of Wampum, not a
    Fathom or two only, as you bring. Now _Ohquesse_ has been sent
    with three _Frenchmen_; _Yonnondio_ not being content with all
    this, has likewise sent _Dennehoct_, and two other _Mohawks_, to
    persuade us to meet him, and to speak with him of good Things.
    Should we not go to him after all this Intreaty, when he is come
    so far, and so near to us? Certainly if we do not, we shall
    provoke his Wrath, and not deserve his Goodness. You say we are
    Subjects to the King of _England_ and _Duke of York_, but we say
    we are Brethren. We must take Care of ourselves. Those Arms
    fixed upon the Posts, without the Gate, cannot defend us against
    the Arms of _la Barre_. Brother _Corlear_, we tell you, that we
    shall bind a Covenant Chain to our Arm, and to his, as thick as
    that Post, (pointing to a Post of the House) be not
    dissatisfied; should we not embrace this Happiness offered us,
    _viz_. Peace, in the Place of War; yea, we shall take the Evil
    Doers, the _Senekas_, by the Hand, and _la Barre_ likewise, and
    their Ax and his Sword shall be thrown into a deep Water. We
    wish our Brother _Corlear_ were present, but it seems the Time
    will not permit of it."

Accordingly _Garangula_, one of the chief _Sachems_ of the _Onondaga's_,
with thirty Warriors, went with Mr. _Le Maine_, to meet the Governor of
_Canada_ at _Kaihohage_. After he had been two Days in the _French_
Camp, Monsr. _la Barre_ spoke to him as follows, (the _French_ Officers
making a Semi-circle on one Side, while _Garangula_, with his Warriors,
compleated the Circle on the other.)

  _Monsr_. De la Barre's _Speech to_ Garangula.[23]

    "The King, my Master, being informed that the _Five Nations_
    have often infringed the Peace, has ordered me to come hither
    with a Guard, and to send _Ohguesse_ to the _Onondagas_, to
    bring the chief _Sachem_ to my Camp. The Intention of the great
    King is, that you and I may smoke the _Calumet_[24] of Peace
    together, but on this Condition, that you promise me, in the
    Name of the _Senekas, Cayugas, Onondagas_, and _Mohawks_, to
    give intire Satisfaction and Reparation to his Subjects; and for
    the future never to molest them.

    "The _Senekas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneydoes_, and _Mohawks_ have
    robbed and abused all the Traders that were passing to the
    _Illinois_ and _Umamies_, and other _Indian_ Nations, the
    Children of my King. They have acted, on these Occasions,
    contrary to the Treaty of Peace with my Predecessor. I am
    ordered therefore to demand Satisfaction, and to tell them, that
    in case of Refusal, or their plundering us any more, that I have
    express Orders to declare War. This Belt confirms my Words. The
    Warriors of the _Five Nations_ have conducted the _English_ into
    the Lakes, which belong to the King, my Master, and brought the
    _English_ among the Nations that are his Children, to destroy
    the Trade of his Subjects, and to withdraw these Nations from
    him. They have carried the _English_ thither, notwithstanding
    the Prohibition of the late Governor of _New-York_, who foresaw
    the Risque that both they and you would run. I am willing to
    forget these Things, but if ever the like shall happen for the
    future, I have express Orders to declare War against you. This
    Belt confirms my Words. Your Warriors have made several
    barbarous Incursions on the _Illinois_ and _Umamies_; they have
    massacred Men, Women, and Children, and have made many of these
    Nations Prisoners, who thought themselves safe in their Villages
    in Time of Peace. These People, who are my King's Children, must
    not be your Slaves; you must give them their Liberty, and send
    them back into their own Country. If the _Five Nations_ shall
    refuse to do this, I have express Orders to declare War against
    them. This Belt confirms my Words.

    "This is what I have to say to _Garangula_, that he may carry to
    the _Senekas, Onondagas, Oneydoes, Cayugas_, and _Mohawks_ the
    Declaration which the King, my Master, has commanded me to make.
    He doth not wish them to force him to send a great Army to
    _Cadarackui_ Fort, to begin a War which must be fatal to them.
    He would be sorry that this Fort, that was the Work of Peace,
    should become the Prison of your Warriors. We must endeavour, on
    both Sides, to prevent such Misfortunes. The _French_, who are
    the Brethren and Friends of the _Five Nations_, will never
    trouble their Repose, provided that the Satisfaction which I
    demand be given, and that the Treaties of Peace be hereafter
    observed. I shall be extremely grieved if my Words do not
    produce the Effect which I expect from them; for then I shall be
    obliged to join with the Governor of _New-York_, who is
    commanded by his Master to assist me, and burn the Castles of
    the _Five Nations_, and destroy you. This Belt confirms my
    Words."

_Garangala_ was very much surprised to find the soft Words of the
_Jesuit_, and of the Governor's Messengers, turned to such threatening
Language. This was designed to strike Terror into the _Indians_; but
_Garangula_ having good Information from those of the _Five Nations_
living near _Cadarackui_ Fort, of all the Sickness and other Misfortunes
which afflicted the _French_ Army, it was far from producing the
designed Effect. All the Time that _Monsieur de la Barre_ spoke,
_Garangula_ kept his Eyes fixed on the End of his Pipe; as soon as the
Governor had done speaking, he rose up, and having walked five or six
Times round the Circle, he returned to his Place, where he spoke
standing, while _Monsieur de la Barre_ kept his Elbow-Chair.

  Garangula's _Answer_.

    "_Yonnondio_,

    "I honour you, and the Warriors that are with me all likewise
    honour you. Your Interpreter has finished your Speech; I now
    begin mine. My Words make haste to reach your Ears, hearken to
    them.

    "_Yonnondio_, you must have believed, when you left _Quebeck_,
    that the Sun had burnt up all the Forests which render our
    Country inaccessible to the _French_, or that the Lakes had so
    far overflown their Banks, that they had surrounded our Castles,
    and that it was impossible for us to get out of them. Yes,
    _Yonnondio_, surely you must have dreamt so, and the Curiosity
    of seeing so great a Wonder has brought you so far. Now you are
    undeceived, since that I and the Warriors here present are come
    to assure you, that the _Senekas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneydoes_,
    and _Mohawks_ are yet alive. I thank you, in their Name, for
    bringing back into their Country the _Calumet_, which your
    Predecessor received from their Hands. It was happy for you,
    that you left Underground that murdering Hatchet, that has been
    so often dyed in the Blood of the _French_. Hear, _Yonnondio_, I
    do not sleep, I have my Eyes open, and the Sun, which enlightens
    me, discovers to me a great Captain at the Head of a Company of
    Soldiers, who speaks as if he were dreaming. He says, that he
    only came to the Lake to smoke on the great _Calumet_ with the
    _Onondagas_. But _Garangula_ says, that he sees the contrary,
    that it was to knock them on the Head, if Sickness had not
    weakened the Arms of the _French_.

    "I see _Yonnondio_ raving in a Camp of sick Men, whose Lives the
    great Spirit has saved, by inflicting this Sickness on them.
    Hear, _Yonnondio_, our Women had taken their Clubs, our Children
    and old Men had carried their Bows and Arrows into the Heart of
    your Camp, if our Warriors had not disarmed them, and kept them
    back, when your Messenger, _Ohguesse_, came to our Castles. It
    is done, and I have said it. Hear, _Yonnondio_, we plundered
    none of the _French_, but those that carried Guns, Powder, and
    Ball to the _Iwikties_ and _Chictaghicks_, because those Arms
    might have cost us our Lives. Herein we follow the Example of
    the Jesuits, who stave all the Caggs of Rum brought to our
    Castles, lest the drunken _Indians_ should knock them on the
    Head. Our Warriors have not Bevers enough to pay for all these
    Arms, that they have taken, and our old Men are not afraid of
    the War. This Belt preserves my Words.

    "We carried the _English_ into our Lakes, to trade there with
    the _Utawawas_ and _Quatoghies_, as the _Adirondacks_ brought
    the _French_ to our Castles, to carry on a Trade which the
    _English_ say is theirs. We are born free, we neither depend on
    _Yonnondio_ nor _Corlear_.

    "We may go where we please, and carry with us whom we please,
    and buy and sell what we please: If your Allies be your Slaves,
    use them as such, command them to receive no other but your
    People. This Belt preserves my Words.

    "We knock'd the _Twihtwies_ and _Chictaghicks_ on the Head,
    because they had cut down the Trees of Peace, which were the
    Limits of our Country. They have hunted Bevers on our Lands:
    They have acted contrary to the Customs of all _Indians_; for
    they left none of the Bevers alive, they killed both Male and
    Female. They brought the _Satanas_[25] into their Country, to
    take Part with them, after they had concerted ill Designs
    against us. We have done less than either the _English_ or
    _French_, that have usurped the Lands of so many _Indian_
    Nations, and chased them from their own Country. This Belt
    preserves my Words. Hear, _Yonnondio_, what I say is the Voice
    of all the _Five Nations_; hear what they answer, open your Ears
    to what they speak: The _Senekas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneydoes_,
    and _Mohawks_ say, that when they buried the Hatchet at
    _Cadarackui_ (in the Presence of your Predecessor) in the Middle
    of the Fort, they planted the Tree of Peace in the same Place,
    to be there carefully preserved, that, in Place of a Retreat for
    Soldiers, that Fort might be a Rendezvous for Merchants; that,
    in Place of Arms and Ammunition of War, Bevers and Merchandise
    should only enter there.

    "Hear, _Yonnondio_, take Care for the future, that so great a
    Number of Soldiers, as appear there, do not choak the Tree of
    Peace planted in so small a Fort. It will be a great Loss, if
    after it had so easily taken Root, you should stop its Growth,
    and prevent its covering your Country and ours with its
    Branches. I assure you, in the Name of the _Five Nations_, that
    our Warriors shall dance to the _Calumet_ of Peace under its
    Leaves, and shall remain quiet on their Matts, and shall never
    dig up the Hatchet, till their Brethren, _Yonnondio_ or
    _Corlear_, shall either jointly or separately endeavour to
    attack the Country, which the great Spirit has given to our
    Ancestors. This Belt preserves my Words, and this other, the
    Authority which the _Five Nations_ has given me."

Then _Garangula_ addressing himself to Monsieur _le Maine_, said:

    "Take Courage, _Ohguesse_, you have Spirit, speak, explain my
    Words, forget nothing, tell all that your Brethren and Friends
    say to _Yonnondio_, your Governor, by the Mouth of _Garangula_,
    who loves you, and desires you to accept of =this Present of
    Bever=, and take Part with me in my Feast, to which I invite you.
    This Present of Bever is sent to _Yonnondio_ on the Part of the
    _Five Nations_."

When _Garangula_'s Harangue was explained to Monsieur _de la Barre_, he
returned to his Tent, much inraged at what he had heard.

_Garangula_ feasted the _French_ Officers, and then went Home, and
Monsieur _de la Barre_ set out in his Way towards _Montreal_; and as
soon as the General was imbarked, with the few Soldiers that remained in
Health, the Militia made the best of their Way to their own Habitations,
without any Order or Discipline.

Thus a very chargeable and fatiguing Expedition (which was to strike the
Terror of the _French_ Name into the stubborn Hearts of the _Five
Nations_) ended in a Scold between the _French_ General and an old
_Indian_.




  CHAP. V.

_The_ English _attempt to trade in the Lakes_, _and the_ French _attack
the_ Senekas.


The _Marquis de Nonville_ having now succeeded Monsieur _de la Barre_,
in the Year 1685, and having brought a considerable Reinforcement of
Soldiers with him, resolved to recover the Honour the _French_ had lost
in the last Expedition, and revenge the Slaughter the _Five Nations_
continued to make of the _Twihtwies_ and _Chictaghicks_, who had put
themselves under the _French_ Protection; for the _Five Nations_ having
intirely subdued the _Chictaghicks_[26], after a six Years War, they
resolved next to fall upon the _Twihtwies_, and to call them to an
Account for the Disturbance they had given some of their People in their
Bever Hunting. The _Five Nations_ have few or no Bever in their own
Country, and for that Reason are obliged to hunt at a great Distance,
which often occasions Disputes with their Neighbours about the Property
of the Bever. The Bever is the most valuable Branch of the _Indian_
Trade, and as the _Twihtwies_ carried their Bevers to the _French_, the
_English_ encouraged the _Five Nations_ in these Expeditions, and
particularly, in the Beginning of the Year 1687, made the _Five Nations_
a Present of a Barrel of Powder, when their whole Force was preparing to
go against the _Twihtwies_. The _English_ were the better pleased with
this War, because they thought that it would divert the _Five Nations_
from the _Virginia Indians_: But the _French_ were resolved to support
their Friends more effectually by a powerful Diversion, and to change
the Seat of the War.

For this Purpose Mr. _de Nonville_ sent, in _May_ 1687, great Quantities
of Provision to _Cadarackui_ Fort, and gathered the whole Force of
_Canada_ to _Montreal_. His Army consisted of fifteen hundred _French_
of the regular Troops and Militia, and five hundred _Indians_ that lived
near _Montreal_ and _Quebeck_. He sent likewise Orders to the Commandant
at _Missilimakinak_ to assemble all the Nations living round him, and
to march them to _Oniagara_, in order to join the Forces of _Canada_
designed against the _Senekas_, and the other Officers posted among the
_Indians_ Westward had the like Orders.

The _Twihtwies_ received the Hatchet with Joy from the Hands of the
_French_ Officer. The _Outagamies_, _Kikabous_, and _Maskuticks_, who
were not used to Canoes, were at first persuaded to join the
_Twihtwies_, who were to march by Land to _Teuchsagrondie_, where there
was a _French_ Fort, at which they were to be supplied with Ammunition.
But after the _French_ Officer left them, the _Utagamies_ and
_Maskuticks_ were dissuaded by some of the _Mahikander Indians_, who
happened to be with a neighbouring Nation at that Time.

The _Putewatemies, Malhominies_, and _Puans_ offered themselves
willingly, and went to the Rendezvous at _Missilimakinak_; where they
were received by the _Utawawas_ with all the Marks of Honour usually
paid to Soldiers. Though the _Utawawas_ had no Inclination to the
present Enterprize; they could not tell however how to appear against
it, otherwise than by inventing what Delays they could, to prevent their
March.

In the mean while a Canoe arrived, which was sent by Mr. _de Nonville_,
with his Orders to the Officers. This Canoe, in her Passage, discovered
some _English_, commanded by Major _Mac Gergory_, in their Way to
_Teiodonderaghie_. The _English_ thought (after they had an Account of
the new Alliance their King had entered into with the _French_) that the
_French_ would not disturb them in prosecuting a Trade with the
_Indians_ every where, and that the Trade would be equally free and open
to both Nations. With these Hopes a considerable Number of Adventurers
went out, under the Conduct of Major _Mac Gergory_, to trade with the
_Indians_ that lived on the Banks of the Lakes; and that they might be
the more welcome, persuaded the _Five Nations_ to set all the
_Dionondadie_ Prisoners at Liberty, who went along with the _English_,
and conducted them towards _Missilimakinak_, or _Teiodonderaghie_; but
the _English_ found themselves mistaken, for the _French_ Commandant at
_Teiodonderaghie_, as soon as he had Notice of this, sent three-hundred
_French_ to intercept the _English_.

[27] The _Utawawas_ and _Dionondadies_ having likewise an Account of the
_English_, designed to support their own Independency, and to incourage
the _English_ Trade. The return of the _Dionondadie_ Prisoners made that
Nation very hearty in favouring the _English_, they therefore marched
immediately off, with Design to join Major _Mac Gergory_; but the
_Utawawas_ were divided in their Inclinations, their Chief, with about
thirty more, joined the _French_, the rest remained in suspence, and
stood neuter.

The _Utawawas_ thus wavering, disconcerted the Measures of the
_Dionondadies_, for they began to suspect the _Utawawas_, and therefore
immediately returned to secure their Wives and Children that they had
left near the _French_ Fort with the _Utawawas_. The _English_ and their
Effects were seized without any Opposition, and were carried to the
_French_ Fort at _Teiodonderaghie_.

The _English_ brought great Quantities of Rum with them, (which the
_Indians_ love more than their Lives) and the _French_ being afraid,
that if the _Indians_ took to Drinking, they would grow ungovernable,
did what they could to keep them from it. They were most concerned that
the _Putewatemies_ (who had no Knowledge of the _English_, or of that
bewitching Liquor, and were firmly attached to the _French_) should not
taste it.

The _Utawawas_ still contrived Delays to the March, and having got some
of the _Putewatemies_ privately by themselves, they offered them a Cag
of Rum, and said: "We are all Brethren, we ought to make one Body, and
to have one Soul. The _French_ invite us to war against the _Five
Nations_, with Design to make us Slaves, and that we should make
ourselves the Tools to effect it. As soon as they shall have destroyed
the _Five Nations_, they will no longer observe any Measures with us,
but use us like those Beasts they tie to their Ploughs. Let us leave
them to themselves, and they will never be able to accomplish any Thing
against the _Five Nations_."

But the _Putewatemies_ had entertained such Notions of the _French_, as
made them deaf to the Politicks of the _Utawawas_.

The _French_ however grew jealous of these Caballings, and therefore
resolved to delay their March no longer, and would not stay one Day more
for the _Utawawas_, who desired only so much Time to pitch their Canoes,
and went away without them.

Mr. _Tonti_, Commandant among the _Chictaghicks_, met with another Party
of the _English_ of about thirty Men, in Lake _Erie_, as he marched with
the _Chicktaghicks_ and _Twihtwies_, and other neighbouring Nations, to
the general Rendezvous. He fell upon the _English_, plundered them, and
took them Prisoners. The _French_ divided all the Merchandize among the
_Indians_, but kept the Rum to themselves, and got all drunk. The
_Deonondadie_ Prisoners, that conducted the _English_, joined with the
_Mahikander_ _Indians_ that were among Mr. _Tonti_'s _Indians_ (who had
privately dissuaded about twenty of the neighbouring Nations from going
with _Tonti_) and endeavoured to persuade all the _Indians_ to fall upon
the _French_, while they were drunk, and destroy them; saying, the
_French_ are a proud, imperious, covetous People, that sell their Goods
at an extravagant Price; the _English_ are a good natured honest
People, and will furnish you with every Thing at reasonable Rates. But
these Arguments were to no Purpose, for these far _Indians_ had
entertained an extraordinary Opinion of the _French_ Power, and knew
nothing of the _English_.

The _French_ and _Putewatemies_ being gone from _Teiodonderaghie_, the
_Utawawas_ began to be afraid of the _French_ Resentment, and therefore,
the better to keep up the Colour they had put on their Delays, marched
over Land, with all possible Expedition, to the general Rendezvous near
_Oniagara_, where all the _French_ Force, both Christians and _Indians_,
was to meet.

The _Five Nations_ being informed of the _French_ Preparations, laid
aside their Design against the _Twihtwies_, and prepared to give the
_French_ a warm Reception. Upon this the Priest at _Onondaga_ left them,
but the Priest at _Oneydo_ had the Courage to stay. The _Senekas_ came
to _Albany_ to provide Ammunition, and the Commissioners made them a
Present of a considerable Quantity of Powder and Lead, besides what they
purchased. They were under a great deal of Concern when they took Leave
of the Commissioners, and said, "Since we are to expect no other
Assistance from our Brethren, we must recommend our Wives and Children
to you, who will fly to you, if any Misfortune shall happen to us. It
may be we shall never see you again; for we are resolved to behave so,
as our Brethren shall have no Reason to be ashamed of us."

We must now return to Monsieur _de Nonville_'s Army.

Monsieur _Campagnie_ marched eight or ten Days before the rest of the
Army, with between two and three hundred _Cannadians_. As soon as they
arrived at _Cadarackui_, they surprised two Villages of the _Five
Nations_, that were settled about eight Leagues from that Place, to
prevent their giving any Intelligence to their own Nation of the
_French_ Preparations, or of the State of their Army, as it was supposed
they did in the last Expedition under Monsieur _de la Barre_. These
People were surprised when they least expected it, and by them from whom
they feared no Harm, because they had settled there at the Invitation,
and on the Faith of the _French_. They were carried in cold Blood to the
Fort, and tied to Stakes, to be tormented by the _French Indians_,
(Christians, as they call them) while they continued singing in their
country Manner, and upbraiding the _French_ with their Perfidy and
Ingratitude.

While Monsieur _de Nonville_ was at _Cadarackui_ Fort, he had an
Account, that the _Chicktaghicks_ and _Twihtwies_ waited for the
_Quatoghies_ and _Utawawas_ at Lake _St. Clair_[28], with whom they
designed to march to the general Rendezvous, at the Mouth of the
_Senekas_ River. For this Expedition was chiefly designed against the
_Senekas_, who had absolutely refused to meet Monsieur _de la Barre_,
and were most firmly attached to the _English_. The _Senekas_, for this
Reason, were designed to be made Examples of the _French_ Resentment to
all the other Nations of _Indians_.

The Messenger having assured the General, that it was Time to depart, in
order to meet with the western _Indians_, that came to his Assistance,
he set out the twenty-third of _June_, and sent one Part of his Army in
Canoes, along the North Shore of the Lake, while he, with the other
Part, passed along the South, that no Accidents of Wind might prevent
the one or the other reaching, within the Time appointed, at the Place
the _Indians_ were to meet him. It happened, by reason of the good
Weather, that both arrived on the same Day, and joined the western
_Indians_ at _Trondequat_, As soon as the Men were put on Shore, they
hawled up the Canoes, and began a Fort, where four hundred Men were left
to guard the Canoes, and the Baggage. Here a young _Cannadian_ was shot
to Death, as a Deserter, for conducting the _English_ into the Lakes,
though the two Nations were not only at Peace, but their Kings in
stricter Friendship than usual. But this Piece of Severity is not to be
wondered at, when this War was undertaken, chiefly to put a Stop to the
_English_ Trade, which now began to extend itself far into the
Continent, and would in its Consequence ruin theirs. The next Day the
Army began to march towards the chief Village of the _Senekas_, which
was only seven Leagues distant, every Man carrying ten Biskets for his
Provision. The _Indian_ Traders made the Van with Part of the _Indians_,
the other Part marched in the Rear, while the regular Troops and Militia
composed the main Body. The Army marched four Leagues the first Day
without discovering any Thing; the next Day the Scouts advanced before
the Army, as far as the Corn of the Villages, without seeing any Body,
though they passed within Pistol-shot of five-hundred _Senekas_, that
lay on their Bellies, and let them pass and repass without disturbing
them.

On the Report which they made, the _French_ hastened their March, in
hopes to overtake the Women, Children, and old Men; for they no longer
doubted of all being fled. But as soon as the _French_ reached the Foot
of a Hill, about a Quarter of a League from the Village, the _Senekas_
suddenly raised the Warshout, with a Discharge of their Fire-arms. This
put the regular Troops, as well as the Militia, into such a Fright, as
they marched through the Woods, that the Battalions immediately divided,
and run to the Right and Left, and, in the Confusion, fired upon one
another. When the _Senekas_ perceived their Disorder, they fell in among
them pell-mell, till the _French Indians_, more used to such Way of
fighting, gathered together and repulsed the _Senekas_. There were
(according to the _French_ Accounts) a hundred _Frenchmen_, ten _French
Indians_, and about fourscore _Senekas_ killed, in this Rencounter.

Monsieur _de Nonville_ was so dispirited with the Fright that his Men
had been put into, that his _Indians_ could not persuade him to pursue.
He halted the remainder of that Day. The next Day he marched on with
Design to burn the Village, but when he came there, he found that the
_Senekas_ had saved him the Trouble; for they had laid all in Ashes
before they retired. Two old Men only were found in the Castle, who were
cut into Pieces and boiled to make Soup for the _French_ Allies. The
_French_ staid five or six Days to destroy their Corn, and then marched
to two other Villages, at two or three Leagues distance. After they had
performed the like Exploits in those Places, they returned to the Banks
of the Lake.

Before the _French_ left the Lakes, they built a Fort of four Bastions
at _Oniagara_, on the South-side of the Straights, between Lake _Erie_
and _Cadarackui_ Lake, and left a hundred Men, with eight Months
Provisions in it. But this Garison was so closely blocked up by the
_Five Nations_, that they all died of Hunger, except seven or eight, who
were accidentally relieved by a Party of _French Indians_.

The western _Indians_, when they parted from the _French_ General, made
their Harangues, as usual, in which they told him, with what Pleasure
they saw a Fort so well placed to favour their Designs against the _Five
Nations_, and that they relied on his never finishing the War, but with
the Destruction of the _Five Nations_, or forcing them to abandon their
Country. He assured them, that he would act with such Vigour, that they
would soon see the _Five Nations_ driven into the Sea.

He sent a Detachment of Soldiers to _Teiodonderaghie_, and in his Return
to _Canada_, which was by the North Side of the Lake, he left a
sufficient Number of Men, and a Quantity of Provisions, at _Cadarackui_
Fort.

The _French_ having got nothing but dry Blows by this Expedition, sent
thirteen of the _Indians_, that they surprised at _Cadarackui_, to
_France_, as Trophies of their Victory, where they were put into the
Galleys, as Rebels to their King.




  CHAP. VI.

_Colonel_ Dongan's _Advice to the_ Indians. Adario's _Enterprize_, _and_
Montreal _sacked by the_ Five Nations.


Colonel _Dongan_, who had the _Indian_ Affairs very much at Heart, met
the _Five Nations_ at _Albany_ as soon as possible after the _French_
Expedition, and spoke to them on the fifth of _August_, in the following
Words, _viz_.

    "_Brethren_,

    "I am very glad to see you here in this House, and am heartily
    glad that you have sustained no greater Loss by the _French_,
    though I believe it was their Intention to destroy you all, if
    they could have surprised you in your Castles.

    "As soon as I heard their Design to war with you, I gave you
    Notice, and came up hither myself, that I might be ready to give
    all the Assistance and Advice that so short a Time would allow
    me.

    "I am now about sending a Gentleman to _England_, to the King,
    my Master, to let him know, that the _French_ have invaded his
    Territories on this Side of the great Lake, and warred upon the
    Brethren his Subjects. I therefore would willingly know, whether
    the Brethren have given the Governor of _Canada_ any Provocation
    or not; and if they have, how, and in what Manner; because I am
    obliged to give a true Account of this Matter. This Business may
    cause a War between the King of _England_ and the _French_ King,
    both in _Europe_ and here, and therefore I must know the Truth.

    "I know the Governor of _Canada_ dare not enter into the King of
    _England_'s Territories, in a hostile Manner, without
    Provocation, if he thought the Brethren were the King of
    _England_'s Subjects; but you have, two or three Years ago, made
    a Covenant-chain with the _French_, contrary to my Command,
    (which I knew could not hold long) being void of itself among
    the Christians; for as much as Subjects (as you are) ought not
    to treat with any foreign Nation, it not lying in your Power,
    you have brought this Trouble on your selves, and, as I believe,
    this is the only Reason of their falling on you at this Time.

    "Brethren, I took it very ill, that after you had put yourselves
    into the Number of the great King of _England_'s Subjects, you
    should ever offer to make Peace or War without my Consent. You
    know that we can live without you, but you cannot live without
    us. You never found that I told you a Lye, and I offered you the
    Assistance you wanted, provided that you would be advised by me;
    for I know the _French_ better than any of you do.

    "Now since there is a War begun upon you by the Governor of
    _Canada_, I hope without any Provocation by you given, I desire
    and command you, that you hearken to no Treaty but by my Advice;
    which if you follow, you shall have the Benefit of the great
    Chain of Friendship between the great King of _England_ and the
    King of _France_, which came out of _England_ the other Day, and
    which I have sent to _Canada_ by _Anthony le Junard_. In the
    mean Time, I will give you such Advice as will be for your good;
    and will supply you with such Necessaries, as you will have Need
    of.

    "_First_, My Advice is, as to what Prisoners of the _French_ you
    shall take, that you draw not their Blood, but bring them Home,
    and keep them to exchange for your People, which they have
    Prisoners already, or may take hereafter.

    "_2dly_, That if it be possible, that you can order it so, I
    would have you take one or two of your wisest _Sachems_, and one
    or two of your _chief Captains_, of each Nation, to be a Council
    to manage all Affairs of the War. They to give Orders to the
    rest of the Officers what they are to do, that your Designs may
    be kept private; for after it comes among so many People, it is
    blazed abroad, and your Designs are often frustrated; and those
    chief Men should keep a Correspondence with me by a trusty
    Messenger.

    "_3dly_, The great Matter under Consideration with the Brethren
    is, how to strengthen themselves, and weaken their Enemy. My
    Opinion is, that the Brethren should send Messengers to the
    _Utawawas_, _Twihtwies_, and the _farther Indians_, and to send
    back likewise some of the Prisoners of these Nations, if you
    have any left, to bury the Hatchet, and to make a
    Covenant-chain, that they may put away all the _French_ that are
    among them, and that you will open a Path for them this Way,
    they being the King of _England_'s Subjects likewise, tho' the
    French have been admitted to trade with them; for all that the
    _French_ have in _Canada_, they had it of the great King of
    _England_; that by that Means they may come hither freely, where
    they may have every Thing cheaper than among the _French_: That
    you and they may join together against the _French_, and make so
    firm a League, that whoever is an Enemy to one, must be to both.

    "_4thly_, Another Thing of Concern is, that you ought to do what
    you can to open a Path for all the _North Indians_ and
    _Mahikanders_, that are among the _Utawawas_ and further
    Nations: I will endeavour to do the same to bring them Home;
    for, they not daring to return Home your Way, the _French_ keep
    them there on purpose to join with the other Nations against
    you, for your Destruction; for you know, that one of them is
    worse than six of the others; therefore all Means must be used
    to bring them Home, and use them kindly as they pass through
    your Country.

    "_5thly_, My Advice further is, that Messengers go, in behalf of
    all the _Five Nations_, to the _Christian Indians_ at _Canada_,
    to persuade them to come Home to their native Country. This will
    be another great Means to weaken your Enemy; but if they will
    not be advised, you know what to do with them.

    "_6thly_, I think it very necessary, for the Brethren's Security
    and Assistance, and to the endamaging the _French_, to build a
    Fort upon the Lake, where I may keep Stores and Provisions, in
    Case of Necessity; and therefore I would have the Brethren let
    me know what Place will be most convenient for it.

    "_7thly_, I would not have the Brethren keep their Corn in their
    Castles, as I hear the _Onondagas_ do, but bury it a great Way
    in the Woods, where few People may know where it is, for fear of
    such an Accident as has happened to the _Senekas_.

    "_8thly_, I have given my Advice in your General Assembly by Mr.
    _Dirk Wessels_, and _Akus_ the Interpreter, how you are to
    manage your Parties, and how necessary it is to get Prisoners,
    to exchange for your own Men that are Prisoners with the
    _French_; and I am glad to hear that the Brethren are so united,
    as Mr. _Dirk Wessels_ tells me you are, and that there are no
    rotten Members nor _French_ Spies among you.

    "_9thly_, The Brethren may remember my Advice, which I sent you
    this Spring, not to go to _Cadarackui_; if you had, they would
    have served you as they did your People that came from hunting
    thither; for I told you then, that I knew the _French_ better
    than you did.

    "_10thly_, There was no Advice or Proposition that I made to the
    Brethren, all the Time that the Priest lived at _Onondaga_, but
    what he wrote to _Canada_, as I found by one of his Letters,
    which he gave to an _Indian_ to carry to _Canada_, but which was
    brought hither; therefore I desire the Brethren not to receive
    him or any _French Priest_ any more, having sent for _English
    Priests_, with whom you may be supplied to your Content.

    "_11thly_, I would have the Brethren look out sharp, for Fear of
    being surprized. I believe all the Strength of the _French_ will
    be at their Frontier Places, _viz_. at _Cadarackui_ and
    _Oniagara_, where they have built a Fort now, and at _Trois
    Rivieres_, _Montreal_, and _Chambly_.

    "_12thly_, Let me put you in Mind again, not to make any
    Treaties without my Means, which will be more advantageous for
    you, than your doing it by yourselves, for then you will be
    looked upon as the King of _England_'s Subjects, and let me
    know, from Time to Time, every Thing that is done.

    "Thus far I have spoken to you relating to the War."

Then he chid them for their Breach of Faith with _Virginia_. He told
them, that he was informed, that last Spring they had killed a fine
Gentleman, with some others; and that a Party of the _Oneydoes_ was now
there at the Head of _Tames River_, with Intention to destroy all the
_Indians_ thereabout. They had taken six Prisoners, whom he ordered them
to bring to him, to be restored; and that for the future they should
desist from doing any Injury to the People of _Virginia_, or their
_Indians_, otherwise all the _English_ would unite to destroy them. But
at the same time he freed the _Senekas_ from any Blame, and commended
them as a brave and honest People, who never had done any Thing contrary
to his Orders, except in making that unlucky Peace with the _French_,
three Years ago.

_Lastly_, He recommended to them, not to suffer their People to be drunk
during the War: A Soldier thereby (he said) loses his Reputation,
because of the Advantages it will give the Enemy over him.

This honest Gentleman earnestly pursued the Interest of his Country; but
it seems his Measures were not agreeable to those his Master had taken
with the _French_ King; for he had Orders to procure a Peace for the
_French_ on their own Terms, and was soon after this removed from his
Government. Indeed such an active, as well as prudent Governor of
_New-York_, could not be acceptable to the _French_, who had the
universal Monarchy in View, in _America_ as well as in _Europe_.

The great Dispute between Coll. _Dungan_ and the _French_ was in this,
that Coll. _Dungan_ would force the _French_ to apply to him, in all
Affairs relating to the _Five Nations_, and the _French_ would treat
with them independently of the _English_. For this Reason Coll. _Dungan_
refused any Assistance to the _French_, till they, by such Application,
should acknowledge the Dependance of the _Five Nations_ on the Crown of
_England_. But King _James_ ordered him to give up this Point; and that
he should persuade the _Five Nations_ to send to _Canada_, to receive
Proposals from the _French Governor_; and for this Purpose, forced them
to agree to a Cessation of Arms, till their Deputies should go and
return from _Canada_; and that they should, in the mean Time, deliver up
all the Prisoners they had taken from the _French_; and that no Accident
might prevent this, and blast so favourable an Opportunity of making
Peace to the best Advantage, Monsr. _De Nonville_ sent his Orders to all
his Officers in the _Indian_ Countries, to observe a Cessation of Arms,
till the Ambassador of the _Five Nations_ should meet him at _Montreal_,
as they had given him Reason to expect they would in a little Time, to
conclude the Peace in the usual Form.

In the mean Time, _Adario_, the Chief of the _Deonondadies_, finding
that his Nation was become suspected by the _French_, since the Time
they had shewn so much Inclination to the _English_, when they attempted
to trade at _Missilimakinak_, resolved, by some notable Action against
the _Five Nations_, to recover the good Graces of the _French_.

For this Purpose, he marched from _Missilimakinak_, at the Head of a
Hundred Men; and that he might act with the more Security, he took
_Cadarackui_ Fort in his Way for Intelligence: The Commandant informed
him, that Monsr. _De Nonville_ was in Hopes of concluding a Peace with
the _Five Nations_, and expected their Ambassadors in eight or ten Days
at _Montreal_ for that Purpose, and therefore desired him to return to
_Missilimakinak_, without attempting any Thing that might obstruct so
good a Design.

The _Indian_ being surprised with this News, was under great Concern for
his Nation, which he was afraid would be sacrificed to the _French_
Interest, but dissembled his Concern before the _French_ Officer. He
went from _Cadarackui_, not to return home as the Commandant thought,
but to wait for the Ambassadors of the _Five Nations_, near one of the
Falls of _Cadarackui_ River, by which he knew they must pass. He did not
lurk there above four or five Days, before the Deputies came guarded by
forty young Soldiers, who were all surprised, and killed or taken
Prisoners. As soon as the Prisoners were all secured, the cunning
_Deonondadi_ told them, "That he having been informed, by the Governor
of _Canada_, that fifty Warriors of their Nation were to pass this Way
about this Time, he had secured this Pass, not doubting of intercepting
them."

The Ambassadors being much surprised at the _French_ Perfidy, told
_Adario_ the Design of their Journey, who, the better to play his Part,
seemed to grow mad and furious, declaring against Monsr. _De Nonville_,
and said he would, some time or other, be revenged of him, for making a
Tool of him, to commit such horrid Treachery. Then looking stedfastly on
the Prisoners (among whom _Dekanefora_ was the principal Ambassador)
_Adario_ said to them, Go, my Brethren, I unty your Bonds, and send you
home again, tho' our Nations be at War: The _French_ Governor has made
me commit so black an Action, that I shall never be easy after it, till
the _Five Nations_ shall have taken full Revenge.

This was sufficient to persuade the Ambassadors of the Truth of what he
said, who assured him, that he and his Nation might make their Peace
when they pleased. _Adario_ lost only one Man on this Occasion, and
would keep a _Satana_ Prisoner (adopted into the _Five Nations_) to fill
up his Place. Then he gave Arms, Powder and Ball to the rest of the
Prisoners, to enable them to return.

The Ambassadors were chiefly, if not all, _Onondagas_, and _Oneydoes_,
who had been long under the Influence of the _French_ Priests, and still
retained an Affection to them; but this Adventure thoroughly changed
their Thoughts, and irritated them so heartily against the _French_,
that all the _Five Nations_ prosecuted the War unanimously.

_Adario_ delivered the Slave (his Prisoner) to the _French_ at
_Missilimakinak_, who to keep up the Enmity between the _Deonondadies_
and the _Five Nations_, ordered him to be shot to Death. _Adario_
called one of the _Five Nations_, who had been long a Prisoner, to be an
Eye Witness of his Countryman's Death, then bid him make his Escape to
his own Country, to give an Account of the _French_ Cruelty, from which
it was not in his Power to save a Prisoner, he himself had taken.

This heightned the Rage of the _Five Nations_ so, that Monsr. _De
Nonville_'s sending to disown _Adario_ in this Action, had no Effect
upon them; their Breasts admitted of no Thoughts but that of Revenge. It
was not long before the _French_ felt the bloody Effects of this cruel
Passion, for 1200 Men of the _Five Nations_ invaded the Island of
_Montreal_, when the _French_ had no Suspicion of any such Attempt,
while Monsr. _De Nonville_ and his Lady were in that Town. They landed
on the South Side of the Island, at _La Chine_, on the 26th of _July_
1688, where they burnt and sacked all the Plantations, and made a
terrible Massacre of Men, Women, and Children. The _French_ were under
Apprehension of the Town's being attack'd, for which Reason, they durst
not send out any considerable Party to the Relief of the Country, only
once, when the _Indians_ had blocked up two Forts, Monsr. _De Nonville_
sent out a hundred Soldiers, and fifty _Indians_, to try to bring off
the Men in those Forts. The _French_ of this Party were all either taken
or cut to Pieces, except one Soldier, and the commanding Officer, who,
after he had his Thighs broke, was carried off by twelve _Indians_ that
made their Escape. There were above a Thousand of the _French_ killed at
this Time, and twenty-six were carried away Prisoners, the greatest Part
of which were burnt alive. The _Five Nations_ only lost three Men on
this Expedition, that got drunk and were left behind. This, however, did
not satiate their Thirst after Blood, for, in _October_ following, they
destroyed likewise all the lower Part of the Island, and carried away
many Prisoners.

The Consequence of these Expeditions were very dismal to the _French_,
for they were forced to burn their two Barks, which they had on
_Cadarackui_ Lake, and to abandon their Fort there; they designed to
have blown up their Works, when they left that Place; and for that End
left a lighted Match where the Powder lay, but were in such a Fright,
that they durst not stay to see what Effect it had. They went down
_Cadarackui_ River in seven Birch Canoes; and for greater Security,
travelled in the Night. One of the Canoes, with all the Men in it, were
lost, by their Precipitation, as they passed one of the Falls in that
River. The _Five Nations_ hearing the _French_ had deserted _Cadarackui_
Fort, fifty _Indians_ went and took Possession of it, who found the
Match the _French_ had left, which had gone out, and twenty eight
Barrels of Powder in the same Place, together with several other Stores.

The News of the Success the _Five Nations_ had over the _French_ soon
spread itself among all the _Indians_, and put the _French_ Affairs
every where into the greatest Disorder.

The _Utawawas_ had always shewn an Inclination to the _English_, and
they therefore immediately sent openly four _Sachems_, with three
Prisoners of the _Senekas_, which they had, to assure them, that they
would for ever renounce all Friendship with the _French_, and promised
to restore the rest of the Prisoners. They also included seven Nations,
that lived near _Missilimakinak_, in this Peace.

This put the _French_ Commandant there under the greatest Difficulty to
maintain his Post; but there was no Choice, he must stand his Ground,
for the _Five Nations_ had cut off all Hopes of retiring.

The _Nepairinians_ and _Kikabous_, of all their numerous Allies, only
remained firm to the _French_; every one of the others endeavoured to
gain the Friendship of the _Five Nations_; and would certainly have
done it, by murdering all the _French_ among them, had not the Sieur
_Perot_, with wonderful Sagacity and eminent Hazard to his own Person,
diverted them.

_Canada_ was now in a most miserable Condition, for while the greatest
Number of their Men had been employed in the Expedition against the
_Five Nations_, and in trading among the far Nations, and making new
Discoveries and Settlements, Tillage and Husbandry had been neglected;
and they lost several Thousands of their Inhabitants, by the continual
Incursions of small Parties, so that none durst hazard themselves out of
fortified Places; indeed, it is hard to conceive what Distress the
_French_ were then under, for tho' they were every where almost
starving, they could not plant nor sow, or go from one Village to
another for Relief, but with imminent Danger of having their Scalps
carried away by the sculking _Indians_; at last the whole Country being
laid waste, Famine began to rage, and was like to have put a miserable
End to that Colony.

If the _Indians_ had understood the Method of attacking Forts, nothing
could have preserved the _French_ from an entire Destruction at this
Time; for whoever considers the State of the _Indian_ Affairs during
this Period, how the _Five Nations_ were divided in their Sentiments and
Measures; that the _Onondagas_, _Cayugas_, and _Oneydoes_, under the
Influence of the _French_ Jesuites, were diverted from prosecuting the
War against _Canada_, by the Jesuites cunningly spiriting up those three
Nations against the _Virginia Indians_, and persuading them to send out
their Parties that Way: That the _Senekas_ had a War at the same Time
upon their Hands with three numerous _Indian_ Nations, the _Utawawas_,
_Chicktaghicks_, and _Twihtwies_; and that the Measures the _English_
observed all King _James_'s Reign, gave the _Indians_ rather Grounds of
Jealousy than Assistance: I say, whoever considers all these Things, and
what the _Five Nations_ did actually perform, under all these
Disadvantages against the _French_, will hardly doubt, that the _Five
Nations_ by themselves were at that Time an Overmatch for the _French_
of _Canada_.

[Footnote 8: The Word Proposition has been always used by the
Commissioners for _Indian Affairs_ at _Albany_, to signify Proposals or
Articles in the Treaties or Agreements made with the _Indians_.]

[Footnote 9: A Castle of the _Sennekas_, from whence the _French_ call
the _Sennekas Tonontouan_.]

[Footnote 10: Comprehended under the general Name of _Utawawas_.]

[Footnote 11: All _Indians_ make Use of a Hatchet or Axe, as an Emblem
to express War.]

[Footnote 12: The Name the _Five Nations_ always give the Governor of
_Virginia_.]

[Footnote 13: The _Five Nations_ always express Peace by the Metaphor of
a Tree.]

[Footnote 14: The _French Priests_ had, from Time to Time, persuaded
several of the _Five Nations_ to leave their own Country, and to settle
near _Montreal_; where the _French_ are very industrious in encouraging
them. Their Numbers have been likewise increased by the Prisoners the
_French_ have taken in War, and by others that have run from their own
Country; because of some Mischief that they had done, or Debts which
they owed the Christians. These _Indians_ are all profess'd Papists, and
for that Reason are commonly called the _praying Indians_ by their
Countrymen, and they are called _Cahnuagas_ by the People of _Albany_,
from the Place where they live; the _French_ value them on Account of
the Intelligence they give in Time of War, and their Knowledge of the
Countries.]

[Footnote 15: _New-York._]

[Footnote 16: _Virginia._]

[Footnote 17: _Maryland._]

[Footnote 18: The _Mohawks_ Country is situated between the other
Nations and _Albany_.]

[Footnote 19: _Ronoon_ signifies Nation or People, in the Language of
the _Five Nations_; they say _Tuihtuih-ronoons, Chichighik-ronoon,
Deonondadik-ronoon_, &c.]

[Footnote 20: That is, the _Partridge_.]

[Footnote 21: Pointing to the _Jesuite_.]

[Footnote 22: The _Indians_ commonly gave a new Name to any Person they
receive or adapt into their Nation. This is the _Jesuites Indian_ Name,
the Interpretation whereof I know not.]

[Footnote 23: Voyages du _Baron de la Hontan_, Tome 1. Letter 7.]

[Footnote 24: The _Calumet_ is a large smoaking Pipe made of Marble,
most commonly of a dark red, well polished, shaped somewhat in the Form
of a Hatchet, and adorned with large Feathers of several Colours. It is
used in all the _Indian_ Treaties with Strangers, and as a Flag of Truce
between contending Parties, which all the _Indians_ think a very high
Crime to violate. These _Calumets_ are generally of nice Workmanship,
and were in Use before the _Indians_ knew any Thing of the Christians;
for which Reason we are at a Loss to conceive by what Means they pierced
these Pipes, and shaped them so finely, before they had the Use of
Iron.]

[Footnote 25: Called _Sawanons_ by the _French_.]

[Footnote 26: Called _Illinois_ by the _French_.]

[Footnote 27: History de le Amerique Septentrionale, par Mr. de la
Poterie, Tome ii. Cap. 16.]

[Footnote 28: In the Straights between Lake _Erie_ and _Quatoghie_
Lake.]




  THE

  H I S T O R Y

  OF THE

  FIVE Indian NATIONS

  DEPENDENT

  On the Province of NEW-YORK.

  PART II.




  THE
  P R E F A C E
  To the Second Part.


_The former Part of this History was written at_ New-York _in the Year_
1727, _on Occasion of a Dispute which then happened, between the
Government of_ New-York _and some_ Merchants. _The_ French _of_ Canada
_had the whole Fur Trade with the_ Western Indians _in their Hands, and
were supplied with their woollen Goods from_ New-York. _Mr._ Burnet,
_who took more Pains to be informed of the Interest of the People he was
set over, and of making them useful to their Mother Country, than
Plantation Governors usually do, took the Trouble of perusing all the
Registers of the_ Indian _Affairs on this Occasion. He from thence
conceived of what Consequence the Fur Trade with the_ Western Indians
_was of to_ Great-Britain; _that as the_ English _had the Fur Trade to_
Hudson's Bay _given up to them, by the Treaty of_ Utrecht, _so, by the
Advantages which the Province of_ New-York _has in its Situation, they
might be able to draw the whole Fur Trade in the other Parts of_ America
_to themselves, and thereby the_ English _engross that Trade, and the
Manufactories depending on it_.

_For this Purpose he thought it necessary to put a Stop to the Trade
between_ New-York _and_ Canada, _by which the_ French _supplied themselves
with the most valuable and necessary Commodities for the_ Indian _Market,
and to set the Inhabitants of this Province on trading directly with the_
Indians. _Besides the Consideration of Profit and Gain, he considered
what Influence this Trade had on the numerous Nations of_ Indians _living
on the vast Continent of_ North-America, _and who surround the_ British
_Colonies; of what Advantage it might be of, if they were influenced by
the_ English _in Case of a War with_ France; _and how prejudicial, on the
other Hand, if they were directed by_ French _Counsels_.

_The Legislature of_ New-York _was soon convinced of the Justness of his
Reasoning, and passed an Act, prohibiting the Trade to_ Canada, _and for
encouraging the Trade directly with the_ Indians. _They were likewise at
the Charge of building a fortified trading House at_ Oswego, _on_
Cadarackui Lake, _and have ever since maintained a Garison there. As this
Act did in its Consequence take a large Profit from one or two
considerable Merchants, who had the Trade to_ Canada, _intirely in their
Hands, they endeavoured to raise a Clamour against it in the Province,
and presented likewise Petitions to the King, in Order to get the Act
repealed. Upon this Occasion Mr._ Burnet _gave me the Perusal of the
Publick Register of_ Indian _Affairs, and it was thought the Publication
of the History of the_ Five Nations _might be of Use at that Time_.

_I shall only add, that Mr._ Burnet's _Scheme has had its desired Effect:
The_ English _have gained the Trade which the_ French, _before that, had
with the_ Indians _to the Westward of_ New-York; _and whereas, before that
Time, a very inconsiderable Number of Men were employed in the_ Indian
_Trade Abroad, now above three hundred Men are employed at the Trading
House at_ Oswego _alone; and the_ Indian _Trade has since that Time yearly
increased so far, that several_ Indian _Nations come now every Summer to
trade there, whose Names were not so much as known by the_ English
_before_.

_This History, from_ New-York, _soon went to_ England, _and I have been
informed, that a Publication, with a Continuance of that Work, would be
acceptable there. I have the more chearfully complied with this Notice,
because of the War threatened from_ France, _believing that a Publication
of this Kind may be useful, whether the present Inquietudes between the
two Nations end in a War or in a Treaty. The_ French _have encouraged
several Publications of this Sort at_ Paris, _and certainly such may be
more useful in a_ British _Government, where the People have so great a
Share in it, than it can be in a_ French _Government, intirely directed by
the Will of their Prince_.

_I now continue this History to the Peace of_ Reswick, _and if I find this
acceptable, and that a farther Continuation of it be desired, I shall,
if my Life and Health be preserved, carry it down farther; but as I have
too much Reason to doubt my own Ability, to give that Pleasure and
Satisfaction which the Publick may expect in Things thus submitted to
their View, I think it not justifiable to trouble them with too much at
once_.




  THE

  H I S T O R Y

  OF THE

  Five _INDIAN_ Nations,

  DEPENDING

  On the Province of _NEW-YORK_.

       *     *     *     *     *

  PART II.

_The History of the_ Five Indian Nations _of_ Canada, _from the Time of
the Revolution to the Peace of_ Reswick.

       *     *     *     *     *




  CHAP. I.

_The State of Affairs in_ New-York _and_ Canada, _at the Time of the_
Revolution _in_ Great-Britain.


We left the _Five Nations_ triumphing over the _French_ in _Canada_, and
they almost reduced to Despair. The Revolution, which happened at this
Time in _England_, seemed to be a favourable Conjunction for the _Five
Nations_; the _English_ Colonies, by the War at that Time declared
against _France_, becoming Parties in their Quarrel: For one will be
ready to think, that the _Five Nations_ being by themselves too powerful
for the _French_, as appears by the preceding Chapter, when these were
assisted by the _Utawawas_, _Quatoghies_, _Twihtwies_, _Chictaghicks_,
_Putewatemies_, and all the _Western Indian Nations_, and when the
_English_ stood neuter; now certainly, when not only all these _Indian
Nations_ had made Peace with the _Five Nations_, but the _English_
joined with them in the War, the _French_ would not be able to stand one
Campaign.

But we shall find what a Turn Affairs took, contrary to all reasonable
Expectations, from the general Appearance of Things, and of what
Importance a resolute wise Governor is to the well-being of a People,
and how prejudicial Divisions and Parties are. For this Reason, it will
be necessary to take a View of the Publick Affairs in the Province of
_New-York_, and in _Canada_, at that Time, in order to understand the
true Causes of the Alterations, which afterwards happened in Favour of
the _French_.

The Revolution occasioned as great Divisions and Parties in the Province
of _New-York_, in Proportion to the Number of People, as it did in
_Britain_, if not greater. The Governor and all the Officers either fled
or absconded; the Gentlemen of the King's Council, and some of the most
considerable or richest People, either out of Love, or what they thought
Duty, to King _James_, or rather from an Opinion they had that the
_Prince of Orange_ could not succeed, refused to join in the Declaration
the People made in favour of that Prince, and suffered the
Administration to fall into different Hands, who were more zealous for
the Protestant Interest, and who were joined by the far greatest Number
of the Inhabitants. After the Revolution was established, they that had
appeared so warmly for it, thought that they deserved best of the
Government, and expected to be continued in the Publick Offices; the
others were zealous to recover the Authority they had lost, and used the
most persuasive Means with the Governors for that Purpose, while the
former trusted to their Merit. This begat great Animosities, which
continued many Years. Each Party, as they were at different Times
favoured by several Governors, opposed all the Measures taken by the
other, while each of them were by Turns in Credit with the People or the
Governor, and sometimes even prosecuted each other to Death. The publick
Measures were by these Means perpetually fluctuating, and often one Day
contradictory to what they were the Day before. The succeeding
Governors, finding their private Account in favouring sometimes the one
Party, and at other Times the other, kept up the Animosities all King
_William_'s Reign, though very much to the publick Prejudice; for each
Party was this while so eager in resenting private Injuries, that they
intirely neglected the publick Good.

The Constitution of Government in the _English Plantations_, where the
Governors have no Salary, but what they can attain with the Consent of
the Assemblies or Representatives of the People, gave Occasion to
imprudent Governors to fall upon these Expedients, as they sometimes
call them, for getting of Money. And a prevailing Faction, knowing for
what Purpose the Governments in _America_ were chiefly desired by the
_English_ Gentlemen, used this great Privilege to tempt a Governor to be
the Head of a Party, when he ought to have been the Head of the
Government. Indeed _New-York_ has had the Misfortune, too frequently, to
be under such as could not keep their Passion for Money secret, though
none found it so profitable a Government, as they did who followed
strictly the true Maxims of governing, without making Money the only
Rule of their Actions.

The frequent Changes of Governors were likewise prejudicial to the
publick Affairs. Colonel _Slaughter_, the first Governor after the
Revolution, happened to die soon after his Arrival, when steady, as well
as resolute Measures, were most necessary. But some think, that the
Occasion of all the Misfortunes lay in the Want of Care in the Choice of
Governors, when the Affairs of _America_ wanted able Hands to manage
them; they think that the Ministry had the saving of Money chiefly in
View, when, to gratify some small Services, they gave Employments in
_America_ to those that were not capable of much meaner Offices at Home.
The Opinion the People had of Colonel _Slaughter_'s Capacity gave ground
to these Surmises; but, if it was so, it happened to be very ill saved
Money; for the Mismanagements in this Country occasioned far greater
Expence to the Crown afterwards, than would have bought such Gentlemen
handsome Estates, besides the great Losses they occasioned to the
Subjects.

The greatest Number of the Inhabitants of the Province of _New-York_
being _Dutch_, still retained an Affection to their Mother Country, and
by their Aversion to the _English_ weakened the Administration. The
common People of _Albany_, who are all _Dutch_, could not forbear giving
the _Indians_ some ill Impressions of the _English_; for the _Mohawks_,
in one of their publick Speeches, expressed themselves thus: "We hear a
_Dutch Prince_ reigns now in _England_, why do you suffer the _English_
Soldiers to remain in the Fort? put all the _English_ out of the Town.
When the _Dutch_ held this Country long ago, we lay in their Houses; but
the _English_ have always made us lie without Doors." It is true, that
the Plantations were first settled by the meanest People of every
Nation, and such as had the least Sense of any Honour. The _Dutch_ first
Settlers, many of them I may say, had none of the Virtues of their
Countrymen, except their Industry in getting Money, and they sacrificed
every Thing, other People think honourable or most sacred, to their
Gain: But I do not think it proper to give particular Instances of this.

The People of _New-England_ were engaged in a bloody War at this Time
with the _Owenagungas_, _Ouragies_, and _Ponacoks_, the _Indians_ that
lie between them and the _French_ Settlements. The _Scahkooks_ were
originally Part of these _Indians_. They left their Country about the
Year 1672, and settled above _Albany_, on the Branch of _Hudson's River_
that runs towards _Canada_. The People of _New-England_ were jealous of
the _Scahkook Indians_, that they remembering the old Difference they
had with the People of _New England_, and the Relation they bore to the
_Eastern Indians_, did countenance and assist these _Indians_ in the War
against _New England_. They had Reason for these Jealousies, for the
_Scahkook Indians_ received privately some _Owenagunga_ Messengers, and
kept their coming among them secret from the People of _Albany_; and
some _Scahkooks_ had gone privately to the _Owenagungas_. They were
afraid likewise, that the _Mohawks_ might have some Inclination to
favour those _Indians_, because some of the _Eastern Indians_ had fled
to the _Mohawks_, and were kindly received by them, and lived among
them.

Notwithstanding all these Failures of good Policy, in the Government of
_New-York_, the _French_ had not gained so great Advantages, if they had
not carefully observed a different Conduct, which it is now necessary to
consider.

_Canada_ was at this Time in a very distressed Condition, the Country
and out Plantations burnt and destroyed, their Trade intirely at a
stand, great Numbers of their People slain, and the remainder in danger
of perishing by Famine, as well as by the Sword of inveterate cruel
Enemies. When such Misfortunes happen to a Country, under any
Administration, though in Truth the Conduct of Affairs be not to be
blamed, it is often prudent to change the Ministers; for the common
People never fail to blame them, notwithstanding their having acted with
the greatest Wisdom, and therefore cannot so soon recover their Spirits,
that are sunk by Misfortunes, as by putting their Affairs into different
Hands.

For these Reasons, it is probable, the _French_ King recalled Mr. _de
Nonville_, but rewarded him for his Services, by an honourable
Employment in the Houshold. The Count _de Frontenac_ was sent in his
Place. This Gentleman had been formerly Governor of that Country, and
was perfectly acquainted with its Interest; of a Temper of Mind fitted
to such desperate Times, of undaunted Courage, and indefatigable, though
in the sixty-eighth Year of his Age. The Count _de Frontenac_ arrived
the second of _October_ 1689. The Country immediately received new Life
by the Arrival of a Person, of whose Courage and Conduct every one had
entertained a high Opinion. Care was taken to increase this Impression
on the Minds of the People, by making publick Rejoicings with as much
Noise as possible. He wisely improved this new Life, by immediately
entering upon Action, without suffering their Hopes to grow cold. He
staid no longer at _Quebeck_, than was necessary to be informed of the
present State of Affairs, and in four or five Days after his Arrival set
out in a Canoe for _Montreal_, where his Presence was most necessary;
and the Winter was already so far advanced, that the Ice made it
impracticable to go in a larger Vessel. By this the old Gentleman
increased the Opinion and Hopes the People entertained of him, that,
without staying to refresh himself after a fatiguing Sea-Voyage, he
would immediately undertake another, that required all the Vigour and
Heat of Youth to withstand the Inclemencies of the Climate and Season,
and the Difficulty of such a Passage.

When the Count _de Frontenac_ came to _Montreal_, he increased the
Admiration the People had of his Vigour and Zeal, by pretending to go to
visit _Cadarackui Fort_, now abandoned, which he had built in the Time
he was formerly Governor. The Clergy and People of _Montreal_ came
jointly with stretched out Arms, representing the Danger of such an
Attempt, and the Difficulties and Hardships that would necessarily
attend it, praying him not to expose a Life that was so necessary for
their Safety. He, with seeming Reluctance, yielded to their Intreaties;
I say with seeming Reluctance, for it was inconsistent with his Prudence
really to have such a Design. This Shew of the Governor's offering to go
in Person, animated some of the Gentlemen of the Country, who
voluntarily went in the Winter, with one Hundred _Indian_ Traders, to
visit that Fort; and finding it in better Condition than they expected,
by the Report of those who had abandoned it, they staid there, and made
some small Reparations in the Walls, which the _Indians_ had thrown
down.

The Count _de Frontenac_ brought back with him _Tawerahet_, a _Capiga
Sachem_, one of the thirteen Prisoners that Mr. _de Nonville_ took at
_Cadarackui_, and sent to _France_. He was in Hopes this _Indian_ would
be useful in procuring a Treaty of Peace with the _Five Nations_, for
they had an extraordinary Opinion of _Tawerahet_; and the _French_ had
found, by sad Experience, that they could not be Gainers by continuing
the War: For this Purpose the Count used _Tawerahet_ with much
Kindness, during his Voyage, and, after he arrived at _Quebeck_, lodged
him in the Castle under his own Roof, and took such Pains with this
_Sachem_, that he forgot all the ill Usage he had formerly received.

The _French_ had the more Reason to desire a Peace with the _Five
Nations_, because they knew, that they would now certainly have the
_English_ Colonies likewise upon them; and if the _Five Nations_ had
been able to do so much Mischief by themselves alone, they were much
more to be feared, when they would be assisted, in all Probability, with
the Force and Interest of the _English_ Colonies.

Four _Indians_ of less Note, who were brought back along with
_Tawerahet_, were immediately dispatched, in this _Sachem_'s Name, to
the _Five Nations_, to inform them of his Return, and of the kind Usage
they had received from the Count _de Frontenac_; and to press them to
send some to visit their old Friend, who had been so kind to them when
he was formerly Governor of _Canada_, and who still retained an
Affection to the _Five Nations_; as appeared by the Kindness _Tawerahet_
and they had received from him. This was the only Method left to the
_French_ of making Proposals of Peace, which it was their Interest by
all Means to procure.

The Governor of _Canada_, as I said, conceived that there was no Way so
proper to keep up the Spirits of the People, who had got new Life by his
Arrival, as by putting them upon Action; and indeed their present
miserable Condition made them forward enough, to undertake the most
desperate Enterprize, when the frequent Incursions of the _Indians_ made
it as dangerous to be at Home, as to attack the Enemy Abroad.

For this Purpose he sent out three Parties in the Winter; one was
designed against _New-York_, the other against _Connecticut_, and the
last against _New-England_.

The _Five Nations_ followed Colonel _Dungan_'s Advice, in endeavouring
to bring off the _Western Indians_ from the _French_, and had all the
Success that could be expected, before Mr. _de Frontenac_ arrived.

They were overjoyed when they heard, that the _English_ had entered into
War with the _French_, and came several Times to _Albany_ to know the
Certainty of it, while it was only rumoured about. The People of
_Albany_ desired them to secure any of the praying _Indians_ that should
come from _Canada_, if they found that they were still ruled by the
Priests; but to encourage them, if they came with a Design to return to
their own Country.

The _Senekas, Cayugas, Onondagas_, and _Oneydoes_, the twenty seventh of
_June_ 1689, before any Governor arrived, renewed the old Covenant (as
they said) which was first made many Years ago with one _Tagues_, who
came with a Ship into their River. "Then we first became Brethren, said
they, and continued so till last fall, that Sir _Edmond Andross_ came
and made a new Chain, by calling us Children; but let us stick to the
old Chain, which has continued from the first Time it was made, by which
we became Brethren, and have ever since always behaved as such.
_Virginia, Maryland_, and _New-England_, have been taken into this
silver Chain, with which our Friendship is locked fast. We are now come
to make the Chain clear and bright. Here they =gave two Bevers=."

King _James_, a little before his Abdication, sent over Sir _Edmond
Andross_ with arbitrary Powers, and he, in Imitation of the _French_,
changed the Stile of speaking to the _Indians_, of which they were very
sensible.

They discovered a great Concern for their People that were carried to
_Canada_; they long hoped (they said) that the King of _England_ would
have been powerful enough to deliver them, but now they began to lose
all Hopes of them.




  CHAP. II.

_A Treaty between the Agents of_ Massachuset's Bay, New-Plymouth, _and_
Connecticut, _and the_ Sachems _of the_ Five Nations, _at_ Albany, _in
the Year_ 1689.


About the Beginning of _September_ 1689, Colonel _John Pynchon_, Major
_John Savage_, and Captain _Jonathan Bull_, Agents for the Colonies of
_Massachuset's Bay, New-Plymouth_, and _Connecticut_, arrived at
_Albany_, to renew the Friendship with the _Five Nations_, and to engage
them against the _Eastern Indians_, who made War on the _English_ of
those Colonies, and were supported by the _French_.

The _Five Nations_ had received four Messengers from the _Eastern
Indians_, which gave the People of _New-England_ some Apprehensions, and
they were therefore desirous to know what Reception these Messengers had
met with.

The _Five Nations_ answered by _Tahajadoris_, a _Mohawk Sachem_, on the
twenty fourth of _September_. He made a long Oration, repeating all that
the Agent from _New-England_ had said, the Day before, and desired them
to be attentive to the Answer now to be made to them. They commonly
repeat over all that has been said to them, before they return any
Answer, and one may be surprized at the Exactness of these Repetitions.
They take the following Method to assist their Memories: The _Sachem_,
who presides at these Conferences, has a Bundle of small Sticks in his
Hand; as soon as the Speaker has finished any one Article of his Speech,
this _Sachem_ gives a Stick to another _Sachem_, who is particularly to
remember that Article; and so when another Article is finished, he gives
a Stick to another to take Care of that other, and so on. In like Manner
when the Speaker answers, each of these has the particular Care of the
Answer resolved on to each Article, and prompts the Orator, when his
Memory fails him, in the Article committed to his Charge. _Tahajadoris_
addressing himself to the Agents, said:

    "Brethren,

    "You are welcome to this House, which is appointed for our
    Treaties and publick Business with the Christians; we thank you
    for renewing the Covenant-chain. It is now no longer of Iron and
    subject to Rust, as formerly, but of pure Silver, and includes
    in it all the King's Subjects, from the _Senekas_ Country
    eastward, as far as any of the great King's Subjects live, and
    southward, from _New-England_ to _Virginia_. Here he =gave a
    Bever=.

    "We are glad to hear of the good Success our great King has had
    over the _French_ by Sea, in taking and sinking so many of their
    Men of War. You tell us in your Proposals that we are one
    People, let us then go Hand in Hand together, to ruin and
    destroy the _French_ our common Enemy. =Gives a Bever.=

    "The Covenant-chain between us is ancient (as you tell us) and
    of long standing, and it has been kept inviolably by us. When
    you had Wars some time ago with the _Indians_, you desired us to
    help you; we did it readily, and to the Purpose; for we pursued
    them closely, by which we prevented the Effusion of much of your
    Blood. This was a certain Sign that we loved truly and
    sincerely, and from our Hearts. =Gives a Belt.=

    "You advise us to pursue our Enemies, the _French_, vigorously;
    this we assure you we are resolved to do to the utmost of our
    Power: But since the _French_ are your Enemies likewise, we
    desire our Brethren of the three Colonies to send us an hundred
    Men for the Security of this Place, which is ill provided, in
    Case of an Attack from the _French_; the Christians have
    Victuals enough for their Entertainment. =Gives one Belt.=

    "We patiently bore many Injuries from the _French_, from one
    Year to another, before we took up the Axe against them. Our
    Patience made the Governor of _Canada_ think, that we were
    afraid of him, and durst not resent the Injuries we had so long
    suffered; but now he is undeceived. We assure you, that we are
    resolved never to drop the Axe, the _French_ never shall see our
    Faces in Peace, we shall never be reconciled as long as one
    _Frenchman_ is alive. We shall never make Peace, though our
    Nation should be ruined by it, and every one of us cut in
    Pieces. Our Brethren of the three Colonies may depend on this.
    =Gives a Bever.=

    "As to what you told us of the _Owenagungas_ and _Uragees_, we
    answer: That we were never so proud and haughty, as to begin a
    War without just Provocation. You tell us that they are
    treacherous Rogues, we believe it, and that they will
    undoubtedly assist the _French_. If they shall do this, or shall
    join with any of our Enemies, either _French_ or _Indians_, then
    we will kill and destroy them. =Gives a Bever.="

Then the _Mohawks_ offered five of their Men, to guard the Agents Home
against any of their _Indian_ Enemies, who they were afraid might be
laying in wait for the Agents, and =gave a Belt=.

Afterwards the Speaker continued his Speech, and said: "We have spoke
what we had to say of the War, we now come to the Affairs of Peace: We
promise to preserve the Chain inviolably, and wish that the Sun may
always shine in Peace over all our Heads that are comprehended in this
Chain. We =give two Belts=, one for the Sun, the other for its Beams."

"We make fast the Roots of the Tree of Peace and Tranquillity, which is
planted in this Place. Its Roots extend as far as the utmost of your
Colonies; if the _French_ should come to shake this Tree, we would feel
it by the Motion of its Roots, which extend into our Country: But we
trust it will not be in the Governor of _Canada_'s Power to shake this
Tree, which has been so firmly and so long planted with us. =Bevers.="

_Lastly_, He desired the Magistrates of _Albany_ to remember what he had
said, and =gave them a Bever=.

But the Agents perceiving, that they had not answered any Thing about
the _Owenagunga_ Messengers, and had answered indistinctly about the War
with the _Eastern Indians_, desired them to explain themselves fully on
these two Points, about which the Agents were chiefly concerned.

The _Five Nations_ answered:

    "We cannot declare War against the _Eastern Indians_, for they
    have done us no Harm: Nevertheless our Brethren of _New-England_
    may be assured, that we will live and die in Friendship with
    them. When we took up the Axe against the _French_ and their
    Confederates, we did it to revenge the Injuries they had done
    us; we did not make War with them at the Persuasions of our
    Brethren here; for we did not so much as acquaint them with our
    Intention, till fourteen Days after our Army had begun their
    March."

After the Company had separated, the _Sachems_ sent to the _New-England_
Agents, desiring to speak with them in private; which being granted, the
Speaker said, we have something to tell you, which was not proper to be
spoken openly, for some of our People have an Affection to the
_Owenagungas_; and we were afraid, that they would discover or hinder
our Designs.

Now we assure our Brethren, that we are resolved to look on your Enemies
as ours, and that we will first fall on the _Owaragees_[29]; and then on
the _Owenagungas_, and lastly on the _French_; and that you may be
convinced of our Intention, we design to send five of our young Men
along with our Brethren to _New-England_, to guard them, who have Orders
to view the Country of the _Owaragees_, to discover in what Manner it
can be attacked with the most Advantage. This we always do before we
make an Attempt on our Enemies. In a Word, Brethren, your War is our
War, for we will live and dye with you.

But it is to be observed, that they confirmed nothing relating to these
_Indians_, by giving Belts.

It is probable, that the _Sachems_ acted with some Art on this Occasion,
for they really had favourable Inclinations towards the _Owenagungas_;
and they had Reason not to increase the Number of their Enemies, by
making War on the _Eastern Indians_, who avoided doing them any Injury.
The People of _Albany_ likewise have always been averse to engage our
_Indians_ in a War with the _Eastern Indians_, lest it should change the
Seat of the War, and bring it to their own Doors.

On the 25th the Magistrates of _Albany_ had a private Conference with
the _Sachems_ of the _Five Nations_, and desired to know their
Resolutions as to the War with _Canada_, and the Measures they resolved
to follow. In this Conference the _Indians_ saw that the People of
_Albany_ were so much afraid of the _French_, that their Spirits were
sunk under the Apprehensions of the approaching War; and for this Reason
made the following Answer.

    "We have a hundred and forty Men out-skulking about _Canada_; it
    is impossible for the _French_ to attempt any Thing, without
    being discovered and harassed by these Parties: If the _French_
    shall attempt any Thing this Way, all the _Five Nations_ will
    come to your Assistance, for our Brethren and we are but one,
    and we will live and dye together. We have desired a hundred Men
    of our Brethren of _Boston_ to assist us here, because this
    Place is most exposed; but if the Governor of _Canada_ is so
    strong, as to overcome us all united together, then he must be
    our Master, and is not to be resisted; but we have Confidence in
    a good and just Cause; for the great God of Heaven knows how
    deceitfully the _French_ have dealt with us, their Arms can have
    no Success. The Great God hath sent us Signs in the Sky to
    confirm this. We have heard uncommon Noise in the Heavens, and
    have seen Heads fall down upon Earth, which we look upon as a
    certain Presage of the Destruction of the _French_: Take
    Courage! On this they all immediately joined in singing and
    crying out, Courage! Courage!"

[Footnote 29: Called by the People of _New-England Panocok Indians_.]




  CHAP. III.

_An Account of a general Council of the_ Five Nations _at_ Onondaga, _to
consider the Count_ De Frontenac'_s Message_.


On the 27th of _December_ 1689, two _Indians_ came to _Albany_, being
sent by the _Onondaga_ and _Oneydo Sachems_, with seven Hands of Wampum
from each Nation, to tell their Brethren in _New-York_ and
_New-England_, that three of their old Friends, who had been carried
Prisoners to _France_, were come with Proposals from _Canada_; that
there was a Council of the _Sachems_ appointed to meet at _Onondaga_,
and that they therefore desired the Mayor of _Albany_, _Peter Scheyler_,
and some others of their Brethren, to come thither, to be present and to
advise on an Affair of so great Consequence; for they were resolved to
do nothing without the Knowledge and Consent of all those that were
included in the Chain with them.

The same Messenger told them, that some Letters were sent to the Jesuit
at _Oneydo_; and that they would neither burn, nor suffer those Letters
to be opened, till the Brethren should first see them.

All that the Magistrates of _Albany_ did on this important Occasion, was
to send three _Indians_ with Instructions in their Name, to dissuade the
_Five Nations_ from entertaining any Thoughts of Peace, or yielding to a
Cessation of Arms.

On the 4th of _January_ one of the chief _Mohawk Sachems_ came to
_Albany_, to tell the _Magistrates_, that he was to go to _Onondaga_,
and desired the Brethren's Advice how to behave there; on which the
Magistrates thought it necessary to send likewise the publick
Interpreter, and another Person to assist at the general Meeting, with
written Instructions; but no Person of Note, that had any Influence on
the _Indians_, went.

When the Messengers arrived at _Oneydo_, they discoursed privately with
one of the Prisoners that had returned from _France_, and found that he
had no Love for the _French_; but it is impossible but that _Indians_,
who had seen the _French_ Court, and many of their Troops, must be
surprised at their Grandeur: he complained however of the ill Usage he
had met with. The _French_ chose, on this Occasion, to send first to
_Oneydo_, because of the Assistance they expected the Jesuit, that
resided there, would give to their Negotiation.

I believe it will not be tedious to the Reader, that desires to know the
_Indian Genius_, if I give a circumstantial Account of this general
Council or Parliament of the _Five Nations_, that he may see in what
Manner a People that we call Savages behave on such important Occasions.

On the 22d of _January_ the general Council was opened at _Onondaga_,
consisting of eighty _Sachems_; in the first Place _Sadekanaghtie_, an
_Onondaga Sachem_, rising up, addressed himself to the Messenger of
_Albany_, saying,

    Four Messengers are come from the Governor of _Canada_, _viz_. three
    who had been carried Prisoners to _France_, and a _Sachem_ of the
    _Praying Indians_ that live at _Montreal_.

    The Governor of _Canada_ notifies his Arrival to us, that he is the
    Count _de Frontenac_, who had been formerly Governor there; that he
    had brought back with him _Tawerahet_ a _Cayuga Sachem_, and twelve
    Prisoners, that had been carried to _France_; then taking the Belt
    of _Wampum_ in his Hand, and holding it by the Middle, he added,
    what I have said relates only to one Half of the Belt, the other
    Half is to let us know, that he intends to kindle again his Fire at
    _Cadarackui_ next Spring, and therefore invites his Children, and
    _Dekanasora_ an _Onondaga Captain_ in particular, to treat there
    with him about the old Chain. Then _Adarahta_ the chief _Sachem_ of
    the _praying Indians_ stood up, and said, with three Belts in his
    Hand, I advise you to meet the Governor of _Canada_ as he desires;
    agree to this, if you would live, and =gives one Belt of _Wampum_=.

    _Tawerahet_ sends you this other Belt, to inform you of the
    Miseries, that he and the rest of your Countrymen have suffered in
    their Captivity; and to advise you to hearken to _Yonondio_, if you
    desire to live.

    This third Belt is from _Thurensera_[30], _Ohguesse_[31], and
    _Ertel_[32], who say by it, to their Brethren: We have interceded
    for you with _Yonondio_, and therefore advise you to meet him at
    _Cadarackui_ in the Spring, because it will be for your Advantage.

When this _Sachem_ had done speaking, the _Mohawk_ Messenger sent from
_Albany_ delivered his Message Word for Word, as he had received it,
without omitting the least Article. The Interpreter, while the _Indian_
was speaking, read over a Paper, on which the Message was set down, lest
any Thing should have been forgot.

After this _Cannehoot_ a _Seneka Sachem_ stood up, and gave the general
Council a particular Account of a Treaty made last Summer, between the
_Senekas_ and the _Wagunha_ Messengers, (one of the _Utawawa_ Nations)
who had concluded a Peace for themselves, and seven other Nations, to
which the other four Nations were desired to agree, and their Brethren
of _New-York_ to be included in it. He said the Proposals made in
several Propositions were as follow.

1. We are come to join two Bodies into one. Delivering up at the same
Time two Prisoners.

2. We are come to learn Wisdom of you _Senekas_, and of the other _Five
Nations_, and of your Brethren of _New-York_. =Giving a Belt.=

3. We by this Belt wipe away the Tears from the Eyes of your Friends,
whose Relations have been killed in the War, and likewise[33] the Paint
from your Soldiers Faces. =Giving another Belt.=

4. We now throw aside the Ax, which _Yonondio_ put into our Hands, by
this =third Belt=.

5. Let the Sun, as long as he shall endure, always shine upon us in
Friendship. Here he =gave a red Marble Sun= as large as a Plate.

6. Let the Rain of Heaven wash away all Hatred, that we may again smoke
together in Peace, =giving a large Pipe= of red Marble.

7. _Yonondio_ is drunk, but we wash our Hands clean from all his
Actions. =Giving a fourth Belt.=

8. Now we are clean washed by the Water of Heaven, neither of us must
defile ourselves by hearkening to _Yonondio_.

9. We have twelve of your Nation Prisoners, who shall be brought home in
the Spring; there he =gave a Belt=, to confirm the Promise.

10. We will bring your Prisoners when the Strawberries shall be in
blossom,[34] at which Time we intend to visit _Corlear_, and see the
Place where the Wampum is made. (_New-York_.)

The Speaker added, we will also tell our Friends the other _Utawawa_
Nations, and the _Dionondadies_, who have eleven of your People
Prisoners, what we have now done, and invite them to make Peace with
you.

He said further, we have sent three Messengers back with the _Wagunhas_,
in order to confirm this Peace with their Nation.

After the _Seneka_ Speaker had done, the _Wagunha_ Presents were hung up
in the House, in the Sight of the whole Assembly, and afterwards
distributed among the several Nations, and their Acceptance was a
Ratification of the Treaty. A =large Belt was given= also to the _Albany_
Messengers as their Share.

The Belt of Wampum sent from _Albany_ was in like Manner hanged up, and
afterwards divided.

_New-England_, which the _Indians_ call _Kinshon_ (that is a Fish) sent
likewise the Model of a Fish, as a token of their adhering to the
general Covenant. This Fish was handed round among the _Sachems_, and
then laid aside to be put up.

After these Ceremonies were over, _Sadekanahtie_, an _Onondaga_ Speaker,
stood up, and said, Brethren, we must stick to our Brother _Quider_, and
look on _Yonondio_ as our Enemy, for he is a Cheat: By _Quider_ they
meant _Peter Schyler_ the Mayor of _Albany_, who had gained a
considerable Esteem among them; as they have no Labeals in their
Language, they pronounce _Peter_ by the Sound _Quider_.

The Messenger from _Canada_ had brought Letters, and some medicinal
Powder, for the Jesuit _Milet_, who resided at _Oneydo_. These Letters
and the Powder were delivered to the Interpreter from _Albany_ to be
carried thither, that the Contents of them might be made known to the
_Sachems_ of the several Nations. The Jesuit was present all this While
in their Council.

Then the Interpreter was desired to speak what he had to say from their
Brethren at _Albany_. He told them, that a new Governor was arrived, who
had brought a great many Soldiers from _England_. That the King of
_England_ had declared War against _France_, and that the People of
_New-England_ were fitting out Ships against _Canada_. He advised them,
that they should not hearken to the _French_, for when they talk of
Peace, said he, War is in their Heart, and desired them to enter into no
Treaty but at _Albany_, for the _French_, he said, would mind no
Agreement made any where else.

After this they had Consultations for some Time together, and then gave
the following Answer by their Speaker.

Brethren, our Fire burns at _Albany_. We will not send _Dekanasora_ to
_Cadarackui_. We adhere to our old Chain with _Corlear_; we will
prosecute the War with _Yonondio_, and will follow your Advice in
drawing off our Men from _Cadarackui_. Brethren, we are glad to hear the
News you tell us, but tell us no Lies.

Brother _Kinshon_, we hear you design to send Soldiers to the eastward
against the _Indians_ there; but we advise you, now so many are united
against the _French_, to fall immediately on them. Strike at the Root,
when the Trunk shall be cut down, the Branches fall of Course.

_Corlear_ and _Kinshon_, Courage! Courage! In the Spring to _Quebeck_,
take that Place, and you'll have your Feet on the Necks of the _French_,
and all their Friends in _America_.

After this they agreed to the following Answer to be sent to the
Governor of _Canada_.

1. _Yonondio_, you have notified your Return to us, and that you have
brought back 13 of our People that were carried to _France_, we are glad
of it. You desire us to meet you at _Cadarackui_ next Spring, to treat
of the old Chain; but _Yonondio_, how can we trust you, after you have
acted deceitfully so often? Witness what was done at _Cadarackui_; the
Usage our Messengers met with at _Utawawa_, and what was done to the
_Senekas_ at _Utawawa_. This was their Answer; however, they sent a Belt
with this, which always shews a Disposition to treat.

2. _Therhansera, Ohguesse_ and _Ertel_, do you observe Friendship with
us, if you have not, how come you to advise us to renew Friendship with
_Yonondio_, they sent them likewise a Belt?

3. _Tawerahet_, the whole Council is glad to hear, that you are returned
with the other twelve. _Yonondio_, you must send home _Tawerahet_ and
the others this very Winter, before Spring, and we will save all the
_French_ that we have Prisoners till that Time.

4. _Yonondio_, you desire to speak with us at _Cadarackui_: Don't you
know that your Fire there is extinguished? It is extinguished with
Blood, you must send home the Prisoners in the first Place.

5. We let you know that we have made Peace with the _Wagunhas_.

6. You are not to think, that we have laid down the Axe, because we
return an Answer; we intend no such Thing: Our Fair-fighters shall
continue the War till our Countrymen return.

7. When our Brother _Tawerahet_ is returned, then will we speak to you
of Peace.

As soon as the Council broke up, their Resolutions were made publick to
all their People, by the _Sachems_ of their several Nations.

Two _Sachems_ were sent to _Albany_, by their general Council, to inform
their Brethren there of their Resolutions, and to bring back the
Contents of the Letters sent from _Canada_ to the Jesuit.

As soon as they arrived, one of the _Mohawks_, that had been sent from
_Albany_ to the Council, delivered the _Wagunha_ Belt, and repeated over
distinctly all the Articles agreed to with that Nation, and referred to
the _Onondaga Speaker_, being one of those sent by the Council of
_Albany_, to recite the Answer to the Governor of _Canada_. He rising
up, repeated over the whole as before set down, and added; The _French_
are full of Deceit; but I call God to witness, we have hitherto used no
Deceit with them, but how we shall act for the future, Time only can
discover. Then he assured the Brethren, that the _Five Nations_ were
resolved to prosecute the War, in Token whereof he presented
_Quider_[35] with a Belt, in which three Axes were represented. Perhaps
by this Representation only three Nations joined in sending it, the
_Cayugas_ and _Oneydoes_ being more under the Influence of the Jesuit
_Milet_, who lived among them intirely, according to their Manner of
Life, and was adopted by the _Oneydoes_, and made one of their
_Sachems_. The Letters from _Canada_ to him were read, they contained
nothing but common News and Compliments.

The _Mohawk_ Messengers, that had been sent from _Albany_, had carried
with them Goods to sell at the general Council. This was taken Notice of
at the general Council, and gave the _Indians_ a mean Opinion of the
People of _Albany_, and particularly of _Peter Schyler_; for it is
exceedingly scandalous among the _Indians_, to employ a Merchant in
publick Affairs; Merchants, (I mean the Traders with the _Indians_) are
looked upon by them as Liars, and People not to be trusted, and of no
Credit, who by their Thoughts being continually turned upon Profit and
Loss, consider every Thing with that private View. As this made a Noise
at _Albany_, by its giving the Jesuit an Opportunity of setting the
Messengers from _Albany_ in an ill Light, _Peter Scheyler_ cleared
himself by Oath, of his having any Interest directly or indirectly in
those Goods, and sent a Belt back with his publick Justification. The
_Mohawk_ Messengers had refused to take the Goods, as being scandalous
to the Business they went on; but were persuaded, by being told that the
Goods belonged to _Quider_.

The Magistrates of _Albany_ advised the _Sachems_, to send the Jesuit
Prisoner to _Albany_, where he might be kept securely, without having it
in his Power to do Mischief, but they could not prevail. The _Indians_
were resolved to keep all the Means of making Peace in their own Hands.

[Footnote 30: _Thurensera_ signifies the Dawning of the Day, and was the
Name given by the _Indians_ to the Jesuit _Lamberville_, who had
formerly resided at _Onondaga_.]

[Footnote 31: Monsr. _le Morne_, the Word signifies a Partridge.]

[Footnote 32: _Ertel_ signifies a Rose, the Name of some other _French_
Gentleman, for whom the _Indians_ had an Esteem.]

[Footnote 33: The _Indians_ always paint their Faces when they go to
War, to make themselves look more terrible to the Enemy. A Soldier in
the _Indian_ Language is expressed by a Word, which signifies a
Fair-fighter.]

[Footnote 34: The _Indians_ in this Manner distinguish the Seasons of
the Year, as the Time of planting Corn, or when it is ripe, when the
Chesnuts blossom, &c.]

[Footnote 35: _Peter Schyler_, Mayor of _Albany_.]




  CHAP. IV.

_The_ French _surprise_ Schenectady. _The_ Mohawks _Speech of
Condoleance on that Occasion_.


The _Count De Frontenac_ being desirous, as before observed, to raise
the drooping Spirits of the _French_ in _Canada_, by keeping them in
Action, and engaging the most daring of them, in Enterprizes that might
give Courage to the rest, had sent out three Parties against the
_English_ Colonies, in Hopes thereby to lessen the Confidence which the
_Five Nations_ had in the _English_ Assistance, now that _England_ had
declared War against _France_. The Party sent against _New-York_ was
commanded by _Monsr. De Herville_, and was ordered to attempt the
surprising of _Schenectady_, the nearest Village to the _Mohawks_; It
consisted of 150 _French Bush-lopers_ or _Indian_ Traders, and of as
many _Indians_, the most of them _French_ Converts from the _Mohawks_,
commonly called the _Praying Indians_, settled at a Place near
_Montreal_, called _Cahnuaga_. They were well acquainted with all that
Part of the Country round _Schenectady_; and came in Sight of the Place
the 8th of _February_ 1689-90.

The People of _Schenectady_ were at that Time in the greatest Security,
notwithstanding that they had Information from the _Indians_, of a Party
of _French_, and _French Indians_ being upon their March that Way. They
did not think it practicable, in that Season of the Year, while it was
extremely cold, and the whole Country covered with Snow. Indeed
_Europeans_ will hardly think it possible, that Men could make such a
March through the Wilderness in the severest Frosts, without any
Covering from the Heavens, or any Provision, except what they carried on
their Backs.

Tho' the People of _Schenectady_ were informed in the Evening before the
Place was surprised, that several sculking _Indians_ were seen near the
Place, they concluded, that they could be only some of the neighbouring
_Indians_; and as they had no Officer of any Esteem among them, not a
single Man could be persuaded to watch in such severe Weather, tho', as
the _French_ owned afterwards, if they had found the least Guard or
Watch, they would not have attempted the Place, but have surrendered
themselves Prisoners: They were so exceedingly distressed with the
Length of their March, and with Cold, and Hunger, but finding the Place
in fatal Security, they marched into the Heart of the Village, without
being discovered by any one Person; then they raised their War Shout,
entered the Houses, murdered every Person they met, Men, Women, and
Children, naked and in cold Blood; and at the same Time set Fire to the
Houses. A very few escaped, by running out naked into the Woods in this
terrible Weather: And several hid themselves, till the first Fury of the
Attack was over; but these were soon driven from their lurking Places by
the Fire, and were all made Prisoners.

Captain _Alexander Glen_, at this Time, lived at a Distance by himself,
on the other Side of the River, and was the most noted Man in the Place.
He had at several Times been kind to the _French_, who had been taken
Prisoners by the _Mohawks_, and had saved several of them from the Fire.
The _French_ were sensible what Horror this cruel sacking of a
defenceless Place, and murdering People in cold Blood, must raise in
Mens Minds; and to lessen this, they resolved to shew their Gratitude to
Captain _Glen_. They had passed his House in the Night, and observing
that he stood on his Defence the next Morning, some of them went to the
River Side, and calling to him, assured him, that they designed him no
Injury. They persuaded him to come to the _French_ Officer, who restored
to him all his Relations that were Prisoners.

Some _Mohawks_ being also found in the Village, the _French_ dismissed
them, with Assurance, that they designed them no Hurt.

This Conduct was not only necessary to promote the Peace which the
_Count De Frontenac_ with so much Earnestness desired, but likewise to
secure their Retreat, by making the _Mohawks_ less eager to pursue them.

The _French_ marched back, without reaping any visible Advantage from
this barbarous Enterprize, besides the murdering sixty-three innocent
Persons in cold Blood, and carrying twenty-seven of them away Prisoners.

The Care the _French_ took to sooth the _Mohawks_ had not intirely it's
Effect, for as soon as they heard of this Action, a hundred of their
readiest young Men pursued the _French_, fell upon their Rear, and
killed and took twenty-five of them.

This Action frightened the Inhabitants in and about _Albany_ so much,
that many resolved to desert the Place, and retire to _New-York_. They
were packing up and preparing for this Purpose, when the _Mohawk
Sachems_ came to _Albany_ to condole, according to their Custom, with
their Friends, when any Misfortune befals them. I shall give their
Speech on this Occasion, as it will be of Use to the Reader, in order to
his forming a true Notion of the _Indian Genius_. They spoke the
twenty-fifth of _March_ as follows.

    "Brethren, the Murder of our Brethren at _Schenectady_ by the
    _French_ grieves us as much, as if it had been done to our
    selves, for we are in the same Chain; and no Doubt our Brethren
    of _New-England_ will be likewise sadly affected with this cruel
    Action of the _French_. The _French_ on this Occasion have not
    acted like brave Men, but like Thieves and Robbers. Be not
    therefore discouraged. We =give this Belt= _to wipe away your
    Tears_.

    "Brethren, we lament the Death of so many of our Brethren, whose
    Blood has been shed at _Schenectady_. We don't think that what
    the _French_ have done can be called a Victory, it is only a
    farther Proof of their cruel Deceit. The Governor of _Canada_
    sends to _Onondaga_, and talks to us of Peace with our whole
    House, but War was in his Heart, as you now see by woful
    Experience. He did the same formerly at _Cadarackui_, and in the
    _Senekas_ Country. This is the third Time he has acted so
    deceitfully. He has broken open our House at both Ends, formerly
    in the _Senekas_ Country, and now here. We hope however to be
    revenged of them. One Hundred of our bravest young Men are in
    Pursuit of them, they are brisk Fellows, and they will follow
    the _French_ to their Doors. We will beset them so closely,
    that not a Man in _Canada_ shall dare to step out of Doors to
    cut a Stick of Wood; But now _we gather up our Dead, to bury
    them_, by =this second Belt=.

    "Brethren, we came from our Castles with Tears in our Eyes, to
    bemoan the Bloodshed at _Schenectady_ by the Perfidious
    _French_. While we bury our Dead murdered at _Schenectady_, we
    know not what may have befallen our own People, that are in
    Pursuit of the Enemy, they may be dead; what has befallen you
    may happen to us; and therefore _we come to bury our Brethren
    at_ Schenectady with =this third Belt=.

    "Great and sudden is the Mischief, as if it had fallen from
    Heaven upon us. Our Forefathers taught us to go with all Speed
    to bemoan and lament with our Brethren, when any Disaster or
    Misfortune happens to any in our Chain. Take this Bill of
    Vigilance, that you may be more watchful for the future. _We
    give our Brethren Eye-Water_ to make them sharp sighted, =giving
    a fourth Belt=.

    "We are now come to the House where we usually renew the Chain;
    but alas! we find the House polluted, polluted with Blood. All
    the _Five Nations_ have heard of this, and we are come to wipe
    away the Blood, and clean the House. We come to invite
    _Corlear_, and every one of you, and _Quider_ (calling to every
    one of the principal Men present by their Names) _to be revenged
    of the Enemy_, by =this fifth Belt=.

    "Brethren, be not discouraged, we are strong enough. This is the
    Beginning of your War, and the whole House have their Eyes fixed
    upon you at this Time, to observe your Behaviour. They wait your
    Motion, and are ready to join in any resolute Measures.

    "Our Chain is a strong Chain, it is a Silver Chain, it can
    neither rust nor be broken. We, as to our Parts, are resolute to
    continue the War.

    "We will never desist, so long as a Man of us remains. Take
    Heart, do not pack up and go away, [36] this will give Heart to
    a dastardly Enemy. We are of the Race of the Bear, and a Bear
    you know never yields, while one Drop of Blood is left. _We must
    all be Bears_; =giving a sixth Belt=.

    "Brethren be patient, this Disaster is an Affliction which has
    fallen from Heaven upon us. The Sun, which hath been cloudy, and
    sent this Disaster, will shine again with its pleasant Beams.
    Take Courage, said he, Courage, repeating the Word several Times
    as they =gave a seventh Belt=.

  (_To the_ English.)

Brethren, three Years ago we were engaged in a bloody War with the
_French_, and you encouraged us to proceed in it. Our Success answered
our Expectation; but we were not well begun, when _Corlear_ stopt us
from going on. Had you permitted us to go on, the _French_ would not now
have been able to do the Mischief, they have done, we would have
prevented their sowing, planting or reaping.

We would have humbled them effectually, but now we dye. The Obstructions
you then made now ruin us. Let us after this be steady, and take no such
false Measures for the future, but _prosecute the War vigorously_.
=Giving a Bever Skin.=

The Brethren must keep good Watch, and if the Enemy come again, send
more speedily to us. Don't desert _Schenectady_. The Enemy will glory in
seeing it desolate. It will give them Courage that had none before,
_fortify the Place_, it is not well fortified now: The _Stockadoes_ are
too short, the _Indians_ can jump over them. =Gave a Bever Skin.=

Brethren, The Mischief done at _Schenectady_ cannot be helped now; but
for the future, when the Enemy appears any where, let nothing hinder
your sending to us by Expresses, and fire great Guns, that all may be
alarmed. We advise you to bring all the _River Indians_ under your
Subjection to live near _Albany_, to be ready on all Occasions.

Send to _New-England_, tell them what has happened to you. They will
undoubtedly awake and lend us their helping Hand. It is their Interest,
as much as ours, to push the War to a speedy Conclusion. Be not
discouraged, the _French_ are not so numerous as some People talk. If we
but heartily unite to push on the War, and mind _our Business, the_
French _will soon be subdued_.

The Magistrates having returned an Answer on the twenty seventh, to the
Satisfaction of the _Indians_, they repeated it all over, Word by Word,
to let the Magistrates see how carefully they minded it, and then added,

Brethren, we are glad to find you are not discouraged. The best and
wisest Men sometimes make Mistakes. Let us now pursue the War
vigorously. We have a hundred Men out, they are good Scouts. We expect
to meet all the _Sachems_ of the other Nations, as they come to condole
with you. You need not fear our being ready, at the first Notice. Our Ax
is always in our Hands, but take Care that you be timely ready. Your
Ships, that must do the principal Work, are long a fitting out. We do
not design to go out with a small Company, or in sculking Parties; but
as soon as the Nations can meet, we shall be ready with our whole Force.
If you would bring this War to a happy Issue, you must begin soon,
before the _French_ can recover the Losses they have received from us,
and get new Vigour and Life, therefore send in all Haste to
_New-England_. Neither you nor we can continue long in the Condition we
are now in, we must order Matters so, that the _French_ be kept in
continual Fear and Alarm at home; for this is the only Way to be secure,
and in Peace here.

The _Scahkok Indians_, in our Opinion, are well placed where they are
(to the Northward of _Albany_); they are a good Out-guard; they are our
Children, and we shall take Care that they do their Duty: But you must
take Care of the _Indians_ below the Town, place them nearer the Town,
so as they may _be of most Service to you_.

Here we see the _Mohawks_ acting like hearty Friends, and if the Value
of the Belts given at that Time be considered, together with what they
said on that Occasion, they gave the strongest Proofs of their
Sincerity. Each of these Belts amount to a large Sum in the _Indian_
Account.

The _English_ of _New-York_ and the _French_ of _Canada_ were now
entering into a War, in which the Part the _Five Nations_ are to take is
of the greatest Consequence to both; the very Being of the _French_
Colony depended on it, as well as the Safety of the _English_. The
_Indians_ at this Time had the greatest Aversion to the _French_, and
they desired nothing so much, as that the _English_ might join heartily
in this War. We shall see by the Sequel how a publick Spirit, directed
by wise Counsels, can overcome all Difficulties, while a selfish Spirit
loses all, even natural Advantages. In the present Case, the Turn Things
took seems to have been entirely owing to one Thing. The French in
making the Count _de Frontenac_ Governor of _Canada_, chose the Man
every Way the best qualified for this Service: The _English_ seemed to
have little Regard to the Qualification of the Person they sent, but to
gratify a Relation or a Friend, by giving him an Opportunity to make a
Fortune; and as he knew that he was recommended with this View, his
Counsels were chiefly employed for this Purpose.

By this Means an _English Governor_ generally wants the Esteem of the
People; while they think that a Governor has not the Good of the People
in View, but his own, they on all Occasions are jealous of him; so that
even a good Governor, with more Difficulty, pursues generous Purposes
and publick Benefits, because the People suspect them to be mere
Pretences to cover a private Design. It is for this Reason, that any
Man, opposing a Governor, is sure to meet with the Favour of the People,
almost in every Case. On the other Hand, the Opinion the _French_ had of
the Count _de Frontenac_'s publick Spirit, and of his Wisdom and
Diligence, made them enter into all his Measures without hesitating, and
chearfully obey all his Commands.

[Footnote 36: This was spoke to the _English_, who were about removing
from _Albany_.]




  CHAP. V.

_The_ Five Nations _continue the War with the_ French; _the_ Mohawks
_incline to Peace_; _their Conferences with the_ Governor _of_ New-York.


The _Governor_ of _Canada_ received Hopes that the _Five Nations_
inclined to Peace, by their returning an Answer to _Therawaet_'s
Message, and thought he might now venture to send some _French_ to them
with further Proposals. The Chevalier _D'O_, with an Interpreter called
_Collin_, and some others, went; but they had a much warmer Reception
than they expected, being forced to run the Gauntlet through a long Lane
of _Indians_, as they entered their Castle, and were afterwards
delivered up Prisoners to the _English_.

The _Five Nations_ kept out at this Time small Parties, that continually
harassed the _French_. The Count _de Frontenac_ sent Captain _Louvigni_
to _Missilimakinak_, to relieve the Garison, and he had Orders, by all
Means, to prevent the Peace which the _Utawawas_ and _Quatoghies_ were
upon the Point of concluding with the _Five Nations_. He carried with
him one hundred forty three _French_, and six _Indians_, and was
likewise accompanied with a Lieutenant and thirty Men, till he got one
hundred twenty Miles from _Montreal_. They were met in _Cadarackui
River_, at a Place called the _Cats_, by a Party of the _Five Nations_,
who fell vigorously on their Canoes, killed several of the _French_, and
made them give Way; but _Louvigni_, by putting his Men ashore, at last
got the better, after a smart Engagement, in which the _Indians_ had
several Men killed, and two Men, and as many Women, taken Prisoners. I
am obliged to rely on the _French_ Account of these Skirmishes; they do
not mention the Number of the _Indians_ in this Rencounter, but I
suspect them to have been much fewer than the _French_; for when the
Enemy are equal in Number, or greater, they seldom forget to tell it.
One of the _Indian_ Prisoners was carried by them to _Missilimackinak_,
to confirm this Victory, and was delivered to the _Utawawas_, who eat
him. The Lieutenant carried the other back with him. He was given to
_Therawaet_.

To revenge this Loss, the _Five Nations_ sent a Party against the
_Island of Montreal_, who fell on that Part called the _Trembling
Point_; and though they were discovered before they gave their Blow,
they attacked a Party of regular Troops, and killed the commanding
Officer, and twelve of his Men: Another Party carried off fifteen or
sixteen Prisoners from _Riviere Puante_, over against _Trois Rivieres_.
This Party was pursued, and finding that they were like to be
overpowered, murdered their Prisoners and made their Escape. These
Incursions kept all the River, from _Montreal_ to _Quebeck_, in
continual Alarm, and obliged the Governor to send all the Soldiers to
guard the south Side of the River. Notwithstanding this, five Persons
were carried away in Sight of _Sorel Fort_, by a small skulking Party,
but they were soon afterwards recovered by the Soldiers. About the same
Time another Party burnt the Plantations at _St. Ours_.

The _Five Nations_ had conceived great Hopes from the Assistance of the
_English_, as the Magistrates of _Albany_ had promised the _Mohawks_,
when they came to condole, after the surprising of _Schenectady_; but
the _English_ were so far from performing these Promises, that many of
the Inhabitants retired from _Albany_ to _New-York_; and they who had
the Administration of Affairs, were so intent on their party Quarrels,
that they intirely neglected the _Indian_ Affairs. Indeed the People of
_New-York_ have too often made large Promises, and have thereby put the
_Indians_ upon bold Enterprizes, when no Measures were concerted for
supporting them. This made the _Indians_ think, that the _English_ were
lavish of _Indian_ Lives and too careful of their own. The _Mohawks_,
who lived nearest the _English_, were most sensible of these Things, and
soon entertained Notions prejudicial to the Opinion they ought to have
had of the _English_ Prudence and Conduct; it is even probable, these
_Indians_ began to entertain a mean Opinion of both the _English_
Courage and Integrity. It is not strange then, that the _Mohawks_ at
last gave Ear to the assiduous Application of their Countrymen, the
_praying Indians_, who, with _French_ Arguments, persuaded them to make
Peace as soon as possible, without trusting longer to the _English_, who
had so often disappointed or deceived them.

The _Mohawks_ sent one of their _Sachems_, _Odigacege_, to the _praying
Indians_, who introduced him to the Count _de Frontenac_. The Count made
him welcome, and told him, that he was sorry for the Injuries his
Predecessors had done them; but that he would treat them like Friends,
if their future Conduct did not prevent him, and =gave him a Belt=, with
Proposals of Peace to his Nation.

Colonel _Slaughter_, who was then Governor of _New-York_, being
informed that the _Five Nations_ were like to make Peace with the
_French_, by their having lost much of their Confidence in the _English_
Assistance, found it necessary to meet them, which he did in the End of
_May_ 1691. There were present at that Time six _Oneydo_, eleven
_Onondaga_, four _Cayuga_, and ten _Seneka Sachems_. He renewed the
Covenant with them, and gave them Presents. The _Mohawks_ having entered
into a Treaty with the _French_, did not join with the other four
Nations in their Answer.

On the second of _June_ the Speaker, in Name of the other four Nations,
told him, they were glad to see a Governor again in this Place; that
they had learned from their Ancestors, that the first Ship which arrived
in this Country surprized them exceedingly; that they were curious to
know what was in its huge Belly. They found Christians in it, and among
them one _Jacques_, with whom they made a Chain of Friendship, which has
been preserved to this Day. By that Chain it was agreed, that whatever
Injury was done to the one, should be deemed, by both Sides, as likewise
done to the other. Then they mentioned the Confusion that had lately
been in the Government of _New-York_, which had like to have confounded
all their Affairs, but hoped all would be reduced to their wonted Order
and Quiet. They complained of several of the Brethren leaving _Albany_
in Time of Danger, and praised those by Name who staid, and then said:
Our Tree of Peace, which grows in this Place, has of late been much
shaken, we must now secure and fasten its Roots; we must frequently
manure and dress it, that its Roots may spread far.

They assured the Governor, that they were resolved to prosecute the War
against the _French_ as long as they lived, and that they would never
speak of Peace, but with the common Consent. They abhor those that do
otherwise, and desired that the Brethren might not keep a
Correspondence with _Canada_ by Letters. You need not (said they) press
us to mind the War, we mind it above all Things; do you but your Parts,
lay aside all other Thoughts but that of the War, for it is the only
Thing we have at Heart. They =gave Bevers= at the End of every distinct
Part of their Answer.

On the fourth the _Mohawks_ spoke to the Governor, in Presence of the
other four Nations: They confessed the Negotiations they had with the
_Praying Indians_, and with the Governor of _Canada_, and that they had
received a Belt from him. Then they restored one of the Prisoners taken
at _Schenectady_, as the Fruit of that Negotiation. They desired the
Governor's Advice, and the Advice of the whole House, what Answer to
return to the Governor of _Canada_; and lastly, desired the _Senekas_ to
release the Prisoners they had taken from the _Praying Indians_.

Colonel _Slaughter_ check'd the _Mohawks_ for entering into a separate
Treaty with the Enemy, and said he could admit of no Proposals of Peace.
He told them, that the Prisoners taken from the _Praying Indians_ must
not be restored; putting them in mind, that some of them having been
formerly released, soon after returned and murdered several People, and
burnt several Houses.

He assured them of his Assistance, and then added, You must keep the
Enemy in perpetual Alarm. The _Mohawks_ thanked him for his Assurance of
Assistance; but took Notice of his saying, _You_ must keep the Enemy in
perpetual Alarm. Why don't you say, they replied, We will keep the Enemy
in perpetual Alarm. In the last Place, the _Mohawks_ renewed their
League with all the _English_ Colonies; adding, Though an angry Dog has
endeavoured to bite the Chain in Pieces, we are resolved to keep it
firm, both in Peace and in War: We now renew the old Chain, that so the
Tree of Peace and Prosperity may flourish, and spread its Roots through
all the Country.

In the last Place, the four Nations answered the _Mohawks_.

    "_Mohawks_, our Brethren, in answer to your Proposals from the
    Governor of _Canada_, we must put you in Mind of his Deceit and
    Treachery; we need only give one recent Instance, how he lately
    sent to the _Senekas_ to treat of Peace, and at the same Time
    fell upon _Schenectady_, and cut that Place off. We tell you,
    that the Belt sent by the _French_ Governor is Poison; we spew
    it out of our Mouths, we absolutely reject it, and are resolved
    to prosecute the War as long as we live."

Then they left the Belt lying on the Ground.




  CHAP. VI.

_The_ English _attack_ Montreal _by Land_, _in Conjunction with the_
Indians, _and_ Quebeck _by Sea_.


It was now evident that the _Indians_ could no longer be amused with
Words, and that, unless the _English_ entered soon upon Action, the
_French_ would carry their Design of making Peace with the _Five
Nations_, and the _English_ be left to carry on the War in _America_ by
themselves. Certainly a more proper Opportunity of doing it with Success
could not be expected, than at present, while the _French_ in _Canada_
had neither recovered their Spirits, nor the Strength they had lost, by
the terrible Incursions of the _Five Nations_. A joint Invasion on
_Canada_ was concerted with _New-England_, they were to attack
_Quebeck_ by Sea, while _New-York_ attacked _Montreal_ by Land. The
Governor therefore proposed to the _Indians_ to join with him in
attacking _Canada_, for which Purpose he told them, that he designed to
send a considerable Force this Summer. They desired Time to consult on
it at their general Meeting, which was soon to be held at _Onondaga_,
and to know what Number of Christians he designed to send, that they
might join a suitable Number of their Men. To this the Governor
answered, that he must not communicate the Particulars of his Design to
so many, because they could not then be kept secret from the Enemy; as
he found by the Discoveries that were last Year made to the _French_ by
that Means.

It was at last agreed, that the _Mohawks_ should join with the
Christians that were to march from _New-York_ directly against
_Montreal_, and that the other four Nations should send a considerable
Party down _Cadarackui Lake_, and join them before _Montreal_.

Major _Peter Schuyler_, the same whom the _Indians_ call _Quider_,
commanded the Party sent from _New-York_, which consisted of three
hundred Men, one half Christians, the other _Mohawks_ and _Scahkook
Indians_. He set out from _Albany_ about Midsummer. As he was preparing
his Canoes to pass _Corlear_'s Lake, he was discovered by the _French
Indians_, who immediately returned to _Montreal_, to give Information of
what they had seen. The Chevalier _Clermont_ was sent out to make
further Discoveries: He found the _English_ above _Chamblie_, and went
immediately back with the Intelligence he there gained. In the mean
while Mr. _de Callieres_, Governor of _Montreal_, did all in his Power
to give Major _Schuyler_ a proper Reception, by drawing the Militia and
regular Troops together for the Defence of the Place. There happened to
be a very considerable Number of _Utawawas_ trading at that Time at
_Montreal_, Mr. _de Colliere_, in Order to engage them to join him, made
a great Feast for them, went among them, and, after the _Indian_ Manner,
began the war Song, leading up the Dance with his Axe in his Hand, and
shouting and hollowing in the same wild Manner the _Indians_ do. This
done, he carried his whole Force, which consisted of twelve hundred Men,
cross the River, and encamped on the south Side, at _la Prairie de la
Magdeleine_, together with a great Number of _Utawawas_, the _Praying
Indians_, and other _French Indians_. The famous _Therawaet_ being now
entirely gained by the Caresses of the Count _de Frontenac_, made one of
the Number. They encamped round the Fort, which stood on a steep rising
Ground between two Meadows.

Major _Schuyler_ having left forty of his Men to guard his Canoes, which
had carried him cross the Lake, marched on without stopping. He got into
a Hollow, which led into the Meadow, without being discovered; and
marching under that Cover, he fell suddenly upon the Militia, who were
soon put into Confusion, and many of them, and of the _Utawawas_, who
were posted with them, were killed. He pursued them as they fled to the
Fort, which he attacked briskly, but was obliged to leave it, by the
Approach of the regular Troops who came to relieve it. He received them
however bravely, and, after they had lost several Officers and many Men,
they retired. Major _Schuyler_ finding the Number of the Enemy much
greater than was expected, and being informed that a considerable Party
of the Enemy had marched Southward, he began to apprehend, that this
Party was sent to cut off his Retreat, by destroying his Canoes. It was
resolved therefore immediately to follow this Party; he overtook them,
and they covering themselves behind some large fallen Trees, he attacked
them, and made his Way through them, but with considerable Loss.

In this Attack the _Mohawks_ signalized themselves, but the _Scahkook
Indians_ did not behave themselves well. The _Mohawks_, upon no
Occasion, yielded an Inch of Ground, till the _English_ first gave Way.
The _French_, by their own Accounts, lost, in the several Attacks made
by _Schuyler_, two Captains, six Lieutenants, and five Ensigns, and, in
all, three hundred Men, so that their Slain were in Number more than
Major _Schuyler_ had with him. The _Mohawks_ suffered much, having
seventeen Men killed, and eleven wounded. They returned to _Albany_ the
eleventh of _August_.

After the _English_ under Major _Schuyler_ had retired, an _Owenagunga
Indian_ came from _New-England_, with an Account of the Preparations
made there against _Canada_, and that they had actually sailed.

This Fleet, which was commanded by _Sir William Phips_, was discovered
in _St. Laurence Bay_, while the Count _de Frontenac_ remained at
_Montreal_; and thereupon he made all possible Haste to _Quebeck_, and
carried three hundred Men with him.

The Fleet, which consisted of thirty Sail, did not reach _Quebeck_ till
the seventh of _October_. Sir _William_ spent three Days in nothing but
Consultation, while the _French_ made all possible Preparation for a
Defence, and, by this Means, suffered them to get over the Fright and
Consternation, into which the first Appearance of the Fleet had thrown
them; for the Place was not in any Posture of Defence. It gave them Time
likewise to draw all the Country round them into the Town. And on the
fourth Day Sir _William_ summoned the _Count_ to surrender, who returned
him such an Answer as his Conduct deserved.

The _English_ landed four Miles below the Town, and had thick Woods to
march through, before they could come at it, in which Ambuscades of
_French_ and _Indians_ were made at proper Distances, by whom the
_English_ were repulsed with considerable Loss. They attempted the Wood
again the next Day with no better Success.

The _French_, in their Account of this Action, say, that the Men, though
they appeared to be as little disciplined as Men could be, behaved with
great Bravery, but that Sir _William_'s Conduct was such, that, if he
had been in Concert with them, he could not have done more to ruin the
Enterprize; yet his Fidelity was never suspected. In short, this Descent
was so ill managed, that the _English_ got on Board again in the Night,
with the Loss of all the Cannon and Baggage which they had landed.

The _French_ thought themselves in such great Danger at that Time, that
they attributed their Deliverance to the most immediate Protection of
Heaven, in confounding the Devices of their Enemy, and by depriving them
of common Sense; and for this Reason the People of _Quebeck_ make an
annual Procession, in Commemoration of this Deliverance.

Sir _William_ cannonaded the Town for some Time with little Execution,
and then returned in Hast, Winter approaching; indeed that Season was
already so far advanced, that he lost eight Vessels in his Return.

The _Five Nations_ continued their Incursions all along _St. Laurence
River_, from _Montreal_ to _Quebeck_, and carried away many Scalps. At
one Time a _French_ Officer, with thirty eight Men, surprised some of
the _Five Nations_ in a Cabin, which they had built near _Lake St.
Piere_. Some of them escaped and informed two other Cabins, which the
_French_ had not discovered, and they returned with their Companions,
and killed the Captain and Lieutenant, and one half of the Men.

Notwithstanding that the _French_ preserved their Country, these
warlike Expeditions, and the Necessity they were under of being on their
Guard, prevented their cultivating the Ground, or of reaping the Fruit
of what they had sowed or planted. This occasioned a Famine in _Canada_,
and, to increase the Misery of the poor Inhabitants, they were forced to
feed the Soldiers gratis, while their own Children wanted Bread.

In _October_ the _Onondagas_, _Cayugas_, and _Oneydoes_ came to
_Albany_, to condole with the _English_, for the Men lost in the
Expedition against _Montreal_, as they had already done with the
_Mohawks_. They said it was ever their Custom to condole with their
Friends when they lost any Number of Men in Battle, though they had the
Victory. They at the same Time, as they had often done before,
complained of the Dearness of Powder: Why, say they, do you call us your
King's Soldiers, when you will not sell us Powder at the usual and
reasonable Rates?

And in answer to a Complaint, of there not being a sufficient Number of
_English_ sent against _Montreal_, the People of _Albany_ upbraided them
with a Breach of Promise, in not sending that Party down _Cadarackui
River_ which they promised, which they said was the chief Reason of the
want of Success in that Expedition.




  CHAP. VII.

_The_ French _and the_ Five Nations _continue the War all Winter with
various Success_. _The_ French _burn a_ Captain _of the_ Five Nations
_alive_.


The old _French_ Governor kept up his Vigour and Spirits wonderfully, no
Fatigue made him ever think of Rest. He knew of what Use it would be to
convince the _Five Nations_, that the joint Attack of the _English_ and
_Indians_ had neither weakened him, nor frightened him from carrying on
the War with as much Vigour as before.

It was absolutely necessary that the _Utawawas_ and other _Western
Indians_, who came to _Montreal_ to trade, should return safe to their
own Country, otherwise there would be an End to the _French_ Trade with
those Nations, upon which the Being of _Canada_ depends; for it is only
by the _Fur-trade_ with these Nations that they make Returns to
_Europe_; and if these Nations did not return in Time, all the _Western
Indians_ would look on the _French_ as lost, and consequently would make
Peace with the _Five Nations_, and perhaps join in the Destruction of
_Canada_.

Captain _la Forest_, with one hundred and ten Men, was sent to conduct
the _Utawawas_ Home; he carried with him considerable Presents sent by
the King of _France_, to confirm these Nations in the _French_ Interest.

Two _Indian_ Prisoners, taken at _la Prairie_, were given to the
_Utawawas_, and carried with them, to confirm the Stories they were to
tell of their Successes against the _English_ and _Five Nations_. These
poor Men were there burnt alive; and if I should add, that it was done
by _French_ Instigation, what I shall relate by and by will clear me of
the want of Charity. I believe it was so, in Order to rivet the Hatred
between these People and the _Five Nations_.

The _Five Nations_ continued their Incursions all Winter on _Canada_.
Forty of the _Mohawks_ fell upon _Fort Vercheres_, and carried off
twenty of the Inhabitants; but the Alarm reaching _Montreal_, Mr. _de
Crizaei_, with one hundred Men of the regular Troops, was sent in
pursuit of them, who recovered most of the Prisoners.

The Count _de Frontenac_ being informed, that a considerable Party of
the _Five Nations_ hunted Bever on the Neck of Land between _Cadarackui
Lake_ and _Lake Erie_, with great Security, resolved to give them a
better Opinion of the Strength and Courage of the _French_. For this
Purpose he sent three hundred and twelve Men to surprise them, under the
Command of Mr. _Beaucour_, a young Gentleman. The _Praying Indians_ of
_Montreal_ were of the Party. This Expedition being in the Winter, they
were obliged to undergo cruel Fatigues, while they marched on the Snow
with snow Shoes, and carried all their Provision on their Backs. Several
of the _French_ had their Feet frozen, which obliged fifteen to return,
with some old _Indians_, that could not bear the Fatigue; and it was
with much Difficulty that _Beaucour_ could persuade the rest to continue
their March. After a March to a surprizing Distance, at that Season of
the Year, they surprised eighty of the _Five Nations_, who
notwithstanding made a brave Defence, and did not run before they left
most of their Men dead on the Spot. Three Women were made Prisoners,
with whom the _French_ immediately turned back to _Montreal_. Some
stragling Parties went towards _Albany_, but did no more Mischief than
killing two or three stragling Persons, and alarming the Country.

The Trade to _Missilimakinak_ being still intirely stopt, by the Parties
of the _Five Nations_ investing _Cadarackui River_, by which, and
_Cadarackui Lake_, the Passage in Canoes is made to the _Western
Indians_, Captain _la Noue_, with a Command of the regular Troops, was
ordered early in the Spring to guard the Traders through that Passage;
but when he reached the _Falls de Calumette_, he discovered the Enemy,
and returned faster than he went.

_La Noue_ had Orders a second Time to attempt this Passage, and went as
far as the River _du Lievre_ (thirty Leagues from _Montreal_) without
any Obstruction; but there discovering several Canoes of the _Five
Nations_, he went back as fast as before.

The _Quatoghies_ and the _Bullheads_[37] having informed the _French_ of
another smaller River, which falls into _Cadarackui River_, and runs to
the Northward of it, by which a Passage might be made to the Lakes, it
was resolved to attempt this Passage, though it were much farther round,
and more dangerous, there being many more rapid Falls in that River.
Three Officers, with thirty Soldiers, were sent with the Traders for
this Purpose, but a Party of the _Five Nations_ meeting with them in the
long Fall, before they reached this River, they were all killed or
taken, except four that escaped back to _Montreal_.

A considerable Party of the _Five Nations_, under the Command of
_Blackkettle_, a famous Hero, continued a long Time on _Cadarackui
River_, in hopes of meeting with other _French_ Parties, in their
Passage towards _Missilimakinak_; but finding that no Attempts were made
that Way, he resolved to make an Irruption into the Country round
_Montreal_. The _French_ say he had six hundred Men with him; but they
usually increase the Number of their Enemies, in the Relation they give
of these Transactions, either to excuse their Fears, or to increase
their Glory.

_Blackkettle_ overrun the Country (to use the _French_ Expression) as a
Torrent does the Low-lands, when it overflows its Banks, and there is no
withstanding it. The Soldiers had Orders to stand upon the defensive
within their Forts. Mr. _de Vaudreuil_ pursued this Party (after they
had burnt and ravaged the whole Country) at the Head of four hundred
Men; he overtook them and surprised them. The _Five Nations_ fought
desperately, though the same Author, at this Place, makes them no more
than two hundred Men. After they had lost twenty Men on the Spot, they
broke through the _French_, and marched off. The _French_ lost four
Officers and many common Soldiers, and they took five Men, nine Women,
and five Children Prisoners.

The _Five Nations_ in a few Days had however some Revenge; a Captain
having had Orders to guard the Vessels from _Montreal_ to _Quebeck_, a
Party of the _Five Nations_ attacked him in his Return, as he passed
through the Islands in _Lake St. Pierre_. He himself was killed, and the
whole Party intirely routed.

The _French_ all this Summer were obliged to keep upon the defensive
within their Forts, while the _Five Nations_, in small Parties, ravaged
the whole Country, so that no Man stirred the least Distance from a
Fort, but he was in danger of losing his Scalp.

The Count _de Frontenac_ was pierced to the Heart, when he found that he
could not revenge these terrible Incursions of the _Five Nations_; and
his Anguish made him guilty of such a Piece of monstrous Cruelty, in
burning a Prisoner alive after the _Indian_ Manner, as though I have
frequently mentioned to have been done by the _Indians_, yet I forbore
giving the Particulars of such barbarous Acts, suspecting it might be
too offensive to Christian Ears, even in the History of Savages. Here
however I think it useful to give a circumstantial Account of this
horrid Act, to shew on one Hand, what Courage and Resolution, Virtue,
the Love of Glory, and the Love of one's Country can instill into Mens
Minds, even where the Knowledge of true Religion is wanting; and on the
other Hand, how far a false Policy, under a corrupt Religion, can debase
even great Minds.

The Count _de Frontenac_, I say, condemned two Prisoners of the _Five
Nations_ to be burnt publickly alive. The Intendant's Lady intreated
him to moderate the Sentence, and the Jesuits, it is said, used their
Endeavours for the same Purpose. But the Count _de Frontenac_ said,
there is a Necessity of making such an Example, to frighten the _Five
Nations_ from approaching the Plantations, since the Indulgence, that
had hitherto been shewn, had incouraged them to advance with the
greatest Boldness to the very Gates of their Towns; while they thought
they run no other Risque, but of being made Prisoners, where they live
better than at Home. He added, that the _Five Nations_ having burnt so
many _French_, justified this Method of making Reprizals. But with
Submission to the Politeness of the _French_ Nation, may I not ask,
whether every (or any) horrid Action of a barbarous Enemy, can justify a
civilized Nation in doing the like?

When the Governor could not be moved, the Jesuits went to the Prison, to
instruct the Prisoners in the Mysteries of our Holy Religion, _viz_. of
the Trinity, the Incarnation of our Saviour, the Joys of Paradise, and
the Punishments of Hell, to fit their Souls for Heaven by Baptism, while
their Bodies were condemned to Torments. But the _Indians_, after they
had heard their Sentence, refused to hear the Jesuits speak, and began
to prepare for Death in their own Country Manner, by singing their Death
Song.

Some charitable Person threw a Knife into the Prison, with which one of
them dispatched himself: The other was carried out to the Place of
Execution by the Christian _Indians_ of _Loretto_, to which he walked,
seemingly, with as much Indifference as ever Martyr did to the Stake.
While they were torturing him, he continued singing, that he was a
Warrior brave and without Fear; that the most cruel Death could not
shake his Courage; that the most cruel Torment should not draw an
indecent Expression from him; that his Comrade was a Coward, a Scandal
to the _Five Nations_, who had killed himself for fear of Pain; that he
had the Comfort to reflect, that he had made many _Frenchmen_ suffer as
he did now. He fully verified his Words, for the most violent Torment
could not force the least Complaint from him, though his Executioners
tried their utmost Skill to do it. They first broiled his Feet between
two red hot Stones; then they put his Fingers into red hot Pipes, and
though he had his Arms at Liberty, he would not pull his Fingers out;
they cut his Joints, and taking hold of the Sinews, twisted them round
small Bars of Iron. All this while he kept singing and recounting his
own brave Actions against the _French_. At last they flead his Scalp
from his Skull, and poured scalding hot Sand upon it; at which Time the
Intendant's Lady obtained Leave of the Governor to have the
_Coup-de-grace_ given, and I believe she thereby likewise obtained a
Favour to every Reader, in delivering him from a further continuance of
this Account of _French_ Cruelty.

Notwithstanding this Cruelty, which the _French_ Governor manifested
towards the _Five Nations_, and thereby his Hatred of them, he found
Peace with them so necessary to _Canada_, that he still pursued it by
all the Means in his Power. For this Purpose the _Praying Indians_ (who,
as I observed before, are _Mohawks_, and have always kept a
Correspondence with their own Nation) were employed to bring it about,
and to endeavour a Cessation of Arms, that the Governor might have an
Opportunity of shewing what kind Things he had in his Heart towards the
_Five Nations_, but without Success.

[Footnote 37: The _Bullheads_ are said to be cowardly People.]




  CHAP. VIII.

_The_ Five Nations _treat with Captain_ Ingoldsby.


The Governor of _New-York_, Colonel _Slaughter_'s Death, soon after his
Arrival, was very prejudicial to the Affairs of _New-York_; for Captain
_Ingoldsby_, who had no other Commission but that of Captain of one of
the Independent Companies of Foot, took upon himself the Government of
the Province, without any Authority; and he having likewise highly
offended a great Number of the People, by the Share he took in the late
Party Quarrels, it was not easy for him to prosecute any vigorous
Measures. He was reckoned to be much more a Soldier than a Statesman.

Captain _Ingoldsby_ met the Five Nations at _Albany_, the sixth of
_June_ 1692. In his Speech, he told them of his vigorous Resolutions to
prosecute the War, and then blamed them for not sending (according to
their Promise) a Party down _Cadarackui River_, to join them that went
from _Albany_ against _Montreal_, and for their Carelesness in suffering
themselves to be surprised last Winter in their Hunting. He desired them
to keep the Enemy in perpetual Alarm, by the Incursions of their Parties
into the Enemy's Country, and to give him timely Notice of all their
Motions. He told them in the next Place, that he heard the _French_ were
still using their wonted Artifice, of amusing them with Offers of Peace;
but the former Proceedings of the _French_ sufficiently demonstrates,
said he to the Brethren, that while Peace is in their Mouths, War is in
their Hearts, and the late horrid Murder of the Brethren, after Quarter
given, sufficiently shews the Perfidy and Rancour of their Hearts. It is
in vain, said he, to think of any Cessation of Arms, much less of a
Peace, while the two Kings are at War at Home. He added, _Virginia_ is
ready to assist us, and only waits the King's Orders, which are daily
expected, and then renewed the Chain for _Virginia_. In the last Place
he told them, that he heard the _Dionondadas_ had sent two Prisoners
Home, with a View thereby to procure Peace; and advised them by all
Means to make Peace with that Nation.

The _Five Nations_ answered by _Cheda_, an _Oneydo Sachem:_

    "_Brother_ Corlear,

    The _Sachems_ of the _Five Nations_ have with great
    Attention heard _Corlear_ speak; we shall make a short Recital,
    to shew you with what Care we have hearkened. After the Recital he
    continued.

    We heartily thank _Corlear_, for his coming to this Place to
    view the Strength thereof, for his bringing Forces with him, and for
    his Resolution of putting Garisons into the Frontier Places. =Giving
    five Bevers and a Belt.=

    Brother _Corlear_, as to what you blame us for, let us not
    reproach one another, such Words do not favour well among Friends.
    They gave nothing with this Article.

    Brother _Corlear_, be patient under the Loss of your Men, as we
    are of the _Mohawks_ our Brethren, that were killed at the same
    Time. You take no Notice of the great Losses we have suffered. We
    designed to have come to this Place to have condoled with you in
    your Loss, but the War took up all our Time, and employed all Hands.
    They =gave five Bevers, four Otters, and one Belt=, as a Gift of
    Condolence.

    Brother _Corlear_, we are all Subjects of one great King and
    Queen, we have one Head, one Heart, one Interest, and are all
    ingaged in the same War. You tell us, that we must expect no Peace
    while the Kings are at War on the other Side the great Water. We
    thank you for being so plain with us. We assure you we have no
    Thoughts of Peace. We are resolved to carry on the War, though we
    know we only are in danger of being Losers. Pray do you prosecute
    the War with the same Resolution. You are strong and have many
    People. You have a great King, who is able to hold out long. We are
    but a small People, and decline daily, by the Men we lose in this
    War, we do our utmost to destroy the Enemy; but how strange does it
    seem to us! How unaccountable! that while our great King is so
    inveterate against the _French_, and you are so earnest with us
    to carry on the War, that Powder is now sold dearer to us than ever?
    We are poor, and not able to buy while we neglect hunting; and we
    cannot hunt and carry on the War at the same Time: We expect, that
    this Evil we so justly complain of be immediately remedied. =Giving
    nine Bevers.=

    Brother _Corlear_, you desire us to keep the Enemy in perpetual
    Alarm, that they may have no Rest, till they are in their Graves; Is
    it not to secure your own Frontiers? Why then not one Word of your
    People that are to join us? We assure you we shall continue to carry
    on the War into the Heart of the Enemies Country. =Giving eight
    Bevers.=

    We the _Five Nations_, _Mohawks_, _Oneydoes_,
    _Onondagas_, _Cayugas_, and _Senekas_, renew the
    Silver Chain whereby we are linked fast with our Brethren of
    _Assarigoa_ (_Virginia_) and we promise to preserve it as
    long as the Sun shall shine in the Heavens. =Giving ten Bevers.=

    But Brother _Corlear_, How comes it, that none of our Brethren
    fastened in the same Chain with us, offer their helping Hand in this
    general War, in which our great King is engaged against the
    _French_? Pray _Corlear_, how come _Maryland_,
    _Delaware River_, and _New-England_, to be disengaged from
    this War? You have always told us, that they are our Brethren,
    Subjects of the same great King. Has our King sold them? Or do they
    fail in their Obedience? Or do they draw their Arms out of our
    Chain? Or has the great King commanded, that the few Subjects he has
    in this Place, should make War against the _French_ alone? Pray
    make plain to us this Mystery? How can they and we be Brethren, and
    make different Families? How can they and we be Subjects of the same
    great King, and not be engaged in the same War? How can they and we
    have the same Heart, the same Head, and the same Interest, as you
    tell us, and not have the same Thoughts? How comes it, that the
    Enemy burns and destroys the Towns in _New-England_, and they
    make no Resistance? How comes our great King to make War, and not to
    destroy his Enemies? When, if he would only command his Subjects on
    this Side the great Lake to joyn, the Destruction of the Enemy would
    not make one Summer's Work.

    You need not warn us of the Deceit and Treachery of the
    _French_, who would probably insinuate Thoughts of Peace; but
    Brethren, you need not fear us, we will never hearken to them: Tho'
    at the same Time, we must own, that we have not been without
    Thoughts of your being inclined to Peace, by Reason of the
    Brethren's Backwardness in pushing on the War. The _French_
    spread Reports among us to this Purpose, and say, that they had in a
    Manner concluded the Matter with you. We rejoice to be now assured
    of this Falshood. We shall never desist fighting the _French_
    as long as we shall live. And =gave a Belt of Wampum=.

    We now renew the old Chain, and here plant the Tree of Prosperity
    and Peace. May it grow and thrive, and spread its Roots even beyond
    _Canada_. =Giving a Belt.=

    We make the House clean, where all our Affairs of Importance are
    transacted with these five Otters.

    We return you Thanks for the Powder and Lead given us; but what
    shall we do with them without Guns, shall we throw them at the
    Enemy? We doubt they will not hurt them so. Before this we always
    had Guns given us. It is no Wonder the Governor of _Canada_
    gains upon us, for he supplies his _Indians_ with Guns as well
    as Powder; he supplies them plentifully with every Thing that can
    hurt us. =Giving five Otters.=

    As to the _Dionondadas_ setting two of our Nation at Liberty,
    we must tell you, that it was not the Act of that Nation, but the
    private Act of one Person: We are desirous to make Peace with that
    Nation as soon as we can, upon honourable Terms. And =gave a Belt=.

The _Mohawks_, before they left the Place, desired a private Conference
with the Governor, and told him, that they were all exceedingly
dissatisfied, that the other _English_ Colonies gave no Assistance, and
that it might prove of ill Consequence. Captain _Ingoldsby_ promised to
write to them, and hoped it would have a good Effect.




  CHAP. IX.

_The_ French _surprise and take three_ Mohawk _Castles_.


The _Praying Indians_ promised their Endeavours to reconcile their
Brethren the _Mohawks_ to the _French_, on whom the _French_ expected
they would have much Influence; but their Endeavours proving
ineffectual, their Correspondence began to be suspected. The _French_
thought they did more Hurt than Good, by the Intelligence the Enemy by
their Means received. The _French_ in _Canada_ began to lose their
Spirits, by being obliged to remain so long upon the defensive, as the
_Five Nations_ gained more Courage by it. The Count _de Frontenac_
thought it therefore absolutely necessary to undertake some bold
Enterprize, to shew the _Five Nations_, that they had to do with an
Enemy still able to act offensively: An Attack on the _Mohawks_ he
thought would be most effectual for this Purpose, because it would shew,
at the same Time, that the _English_ would not protect their nearest
Neighbours. As this was designed to be done by Surprize, the Winter
Season was chosen for this Purpose, as least to be suspected at such a
Time; and when the Enemy could not, without great Hardship, keep Scouts
abroad, to discover them or the _English_ give any Assistance.

The Body of the _French_ designed for this Expedition was put under
three Captains of the regular Troops, and thirty Subalterns, and
consisted of picked Men of the regular Troops of the common Militia of
the Country of the _Praying Indians_, the _Quatoghies_ of _Loretto_,
_Adirondacks_, and _Sohokies_, who live to the eastward of _Boston_,
making in all about six or seven hundred Men, so that a great Part of
the Force of _Canada_ was employed in it. They were well supplied with
all Sorts of Ammunition, Provision, Snow-Shoes, and such Conveniencies
for Carriage, as were practicable upon the Snow, and through such great
Forests as they had to pass. The _French_ at _Canada_ have a Kind of
light Sledges made with Skins, and are drawn by large Dogs on the frozen
Snow.

They set out from _la Prairie de Magdeleine_ the 15th of _January_
1692-3, after having endured what might have been thought unsurmountable
Hardships; they passed by _Schenectady_ at some Distance from it, on the
8th of _February_, at which Time one that had been taken Prisoner, when
that Place was sacked, made his Escape from them, and gave the People of
_Schenectady_ Intelligence of the _French_, who by an Express,
immediately informed the Commandant of _Albany_. The Millitia was
expeditiously raised, and a Lieutenant with fifty five Horse was
immediately dispatched to _Schenectady_; but no Care was taken to give
the _Mohawks_ Notice, which might have been done without much Danger, by
sending up the South Side of the River, whilst the _French_ marched on
the North. The _French_, on the 8th at Night, reached the first _Mohawk_
Castle, where there were only five Men, and some Women and Children in
great Security, their other Men being all abroad, these were all taken
without Opposition. The next Fort not far from it was in like Manner
surprized, without any Opposition, both of them were very small, and
being next the _English_, not fortified.

_Schenectady_ being the nearest _English_ Settlement to the _Mohawks_,
and but a little Way from their nearest Castle, many of them are always
there. The _Mohawks_ then in the Town were exceedingly enraged, that
none went out to assist their Nation; some were sent therefore out the
next Day, to gain Information of the Enemy, and to give the _Mohawks_
Notice; but they returned without doing their Duty.

The _French_ went on to the next _Mohawk_ Fort, which was the largest;
and coming to that in the Night, they heard some Noise, and suspected
they were discovered: But this Noise was only occasioned by a War Dance,
forty of the _Indians_ designing to go next Day upon some Enterprize.
The _French_ approached the Castle silently, and finding the _Indians_
no way on their Guard, opened the Gate, and entered before they were
discovered; but notwithstanding this, and the Confusion the _Indians_
must be in, this Conquest was not without Loss of Blood, the _French_
having lost thirty Men, before the _Indians_ entirely submitted: The
_French_ designed to have put them all to the Sword, but their own
_Indians_ would not suffer it, and gave Quarter: They took three hundred
Prisoners, of whom one hundred were fighting Men. I have no Account of
the Number of _Mohawks_ killed, but no Doubt it was very considerable.

When the Account came to _Albany_, how much the _Mohawks_, who were at
_Schenectady_, were enraged, that no Assistance was sent to their
Countrymen; _Peter Schuyler_ a Major of the Militia offered himself to
go with what Force could be got ready for their Assistance. He went
himself immediately to _Schenectady_, and sent out to discover the
Enemy: His Scouts brought him Intelligence, first, that the _French_
were in Possession of the two smallest Forts, afterwards, that they had
heard great Firing at the largest Fort; and at last, that it was taken.
Having received 200 Men, partly regular Troops, but most of the Militia,
he began his March on the 12th in Quest of the Enemy; but hearing soon
after, that six hundred Men of the upper Castles were on their March,
'tis probable he did not endeavour to be up with the _French_ so soon as
he might; for I find by his Journal, that he was nearer them on the
fourteenth, than he was two Days after. He had not sufficient Force to
fight them: He sent therefore to the upper _Indians_, to hasten their
March. On the 15th he was joined by these _Indians_, in all two hundred
and ninety Men and Boys, very ill armed. His Body then consisted of two
hundred and fifty Christians, and two hundred and ninety _Indians_,
armed fighting Men. They had no other Provision but some Biscuit every
Man had in his Pocket. On the 16th he was informed by an _Indian_, who
pretended to be a Deserter, that the _French_ had built a Fort, where
they designed to wait for him, and fight him; whereupon he sent an
Express to Coll. _Ingoldesby_, then Commandant at _Albany_, to hasten
more Men to join him, with sufficient Provision for the whole. He found
afterwards, that this _Indian_ was sent by the French, on purpose to
persuade the _Indians_ to give over the Pursuit. Major _Schuyler_ came
up to the Enemy on the 17th; when he came near them he did not go on
streight towards them, for Fear of Ambuscades, but marched round. As
soon as he came in Sight, he was saluted with three loud Shouts, which
were answered with as much Noise. The _Indians_ began in their Manner to
secure themselves, by felling the Trees between them, and the Enemy
sallied out to prevent them, but were soon beat back. The _Indians_ fell
to Work again, and desired the Christians to assist them, which was
done, but in such Confusion, that they themselves were in Danger from
the falling Trees. The _French_ sallied a second Time with all their
Force, crying out, _They run, we'll cut them off, and get their
Provisions_; but they were warmly received, and beat back into their
Fort. They sallied a third Time, and were beat back with considerable
Loss, the _Indians_ bringing in several Heads and Scalps. As soon as the
Skirmishing was over, the Major sent back an Express, to hasten the Men
that were to reinforce him, and were to bring Provision, some of the Men
having had no Provision for two Days. The _Major_ then secured himself,
under the Cover of the fallen Trees, and kept out Watches to observe the
_French_.

The 18th proving a cold stormy Day, with Snow, he was informed, by a
Deserter, that the _French_ were upon their March, it not being easy to
follow their Tracks, or to discover them in such Weather. The Officers
were commanded to pursue and retard their March, till the Reinforcement
should come up, but the Men refused to march without Provision. The
Officers, with about 60 Men, and a Body of _Indians_, followed the Enemy
till Night, when they began to secure themselves, by fortifying their
Camp. The Officers wanting a sufficient Number to secure themselves in
like Manner, or to sight the Enemy, returned, leaving about forty
Christians, and one hundred _Indians_, to observe them. On the 19th the
Provisions, with about 80 Men, arrived, under the Command of Captain
_Sims_ of the regular Troops. Every Man, as he was served with
Provision, marched towards the Enemy. The Van was commanded by Captain
_Peter Matthews_ of the regular Troops, who coming up with the Enemy's
Rear, would have attacked them, to retard their March, but the _Mohawks_
were averse to fighting. The French dropt on purpose several of their
Prisoners, who told the _Mohawks_, that the _French_ were resolved to
put all the Prisoners to the Sword, if they should be attacked. The
Enemy passed the North Branch of _Hudson_'s River upon a Cake of Ice,
which, very opportunely for them, stuck there in one Place, while it was
open by a late Thaw, both above and below. The Weather continuing very
cold, and the _Indians_ averse to fighting, Major _Schuyler_ gave over
the Pursuit on the 20th, having lost only four private Men, and as many
_Indians_, two Officers and twelve Men Christians and _Indians_ were
wounded. The _French_ lost thirty three Men (the Bodies of twenty seven
were found) of whom four were Officers, and twenty-six wounded, as the
Deserters told him. Between forty and fifty Prisoners were recovered. I
have been told, that Captain _Matthews_ desired Coll. _Schuyler_, when
he came first up with the _French_, to summon them to surrender; he
said, the _French_ are in great Distress, and this will give them an
Opinion of our Strength; but Coll. _Schuyler_ refused, tho' he was
brave, he was no Soldier; and it is very probable, that the _French_
observing the want of Conduct and Discipline, were encouraged. It is
true, the _English_ were in great Want of Provisions at that Time. The
_Indians_ eat the Bodies of the _French_ that they found. Coll.
_Schuyler_ (as he told me himself) going among the _Indians_ at that
Time, was invited to eat Broth with them, which some of them had ready
boiled, which he did, till they, putting the Ladle into the Kettle to
take out more, brought out a _French_ Man's Hand, which put an End to
his Appetite.

The _French_ went home as fast as they could carry their wounded Men
with them; but coming to a Place, where they had hid Provisions for
their Supply in their return, they found it all spoiled. This put them
in great Distress, so that they were forced to eat their Shoes; they
sent some of the nimblest Men forward to _Montreal_, that Provision
might meet them. As soon as they came near the Settlements they
dispersed, every Man running home to eat, so that they returned to
_Canada_ like an Army routed. The _French_ own they lost eighty Men, and
had thirty three wounded in this Expedition.

One may wonder how it is possible for Men to march several hundred Miles
in the Wilderness, while the Ground is every where covered with Snow,
two or three Feet deep at least; but the foremost march on Snow Shoes,
which beat a firm Track for those that follow. At Night, when they rest,
they dig a Hole in the Snow, throwing the Snow up all round, but highest
towards that Side from whence the Wind blows, so large, as to contain as
many Men as can lye round a Fire: They make the Fire in the Middle, and
cover the frozen Ground round it with the small Branches of the
Fir-Trees. Thus they tell me a Man lyes much warmer, than one imagines
that never tried it.

When the Information of the _French_ came to _Schenectady_, an Express
was sent to _New-York_ to Coll. _Fletcher_ then Governor there; the
Express reached _New-York_, an hundred and fifty Miles from _Albany_,
the 12th at ten in the Night. The Governor got the City Regiment under
Arms by eight the next Morning.

He called out to know who were willing to go with him to the Frontiers,
they all immediately threw up their Hats, and answered one and all.
Indeed the People of this Province have, upon all Occasions, shewn
their Courage and Resolution in Defence of their Country; but the
Misfortune is, they are under no Discipline, and have been seldom led by
Men that knew their Duty. The Governor ordered an hundred and fifty
Voluntiers for this Service, and as many more from _Long-Island_. The
River then happened to be open by a sudden Thaw, which does not, at that
Time of the Year, happen once in twenty Years. He embarked three hundred
Men in five Sloops, by four in the Afternoon of the 14th, and arrived at
_Albany_ the 17th at nine in the Morning. The same Day the Governor went
to _Schenectady_, and ordered the Men to follow, but before they could
get every Thing ready for their March into the Woods, they had an
Account, that Major _Schuyler_ was upon his Return. Several Gentlemen of
_Albany_, particularly Mr. _Lanslear_, a Gentleman of the best Estate
there, went out Voluntiers under Major _Schuyler_, which I ought not to
have forgot.

Coll. _Fletcher_ made a Speech to the _Mohawks_ at _Albany_, he blamed
their supine Negligence, in suffering themselves to be surprised in the
Manner they were in Time of War. He told them that they had Reason to be
convinced, that the _English_ were their Friends heartily, by the Number
of Men he had marched to their Assistance in a very little Time, upon
the first Notice. He promised to wipe away their Tears in the Spring, by
considerable Presents; and that he would, in the mean while, take Care
of their Subsistence, by providing Houses and Victuals for them. He told
them, he doubted they had some false Brethren among them, that gave the
_French_ Information, and favoured their Designs; and in the last Place,
advised them to convince the _French_, that they had not lost their
Courage with this Misfortune.

The _Mohawks_, in their Answer, called Coll. _Fletcher_ by the Name of
_Cayenguirago_; and he was called so by the _Indians_ always after
this. It signifies _a great swift Arrow_, as an Acknowledgement of the
Speed he made to their Assistance. But they appeared, in their Answer,
to be quite disheartned; they had not, in the Memory of any Man,
received such a Blow. They said their Strength was quite broke, by the
Continuance of the War; but they added, if all the _English_ Colonies
would join, they could still easily take _Canada_: Their being so ill
armed, was the Reason (they said) that the _French_ had now escaped.

The _French_, continued they, arm their _Indians_ compleatly, and
furnish them with every Thing necessary for War, as we find every Time
we meet with them.

The _French_ had got a great Quantity of Furs, and other Peltry, at
_Missilimakinak_, by their Trade with the _Indians_; but the _Five
Nations_ had so effectually blocked up the Passage between that and
_Canada_, that they had remained there useless to the _French_ for
several Years. The Count _de Frontenac_, after his Success against the
_Mohawks_, was in Hopes the _Five Nations_ would keep more at home in
Defence of their own Castles, and with these Hopes sent a Lieutenant,
with eighteen _Canadians_, and twenty _praying Indians_, to open the
Passage to _Missilimakinak_; but this Party fell in with another of the
_Five Nations_, who entirely routed them, so that a few escaped only, to
give an Account of their Misfortune; at last 200 Canoes, loaded with
Furs from _Missilimakinak_, arrived at _Montreal_, which gave as
universal a Joy to _Canada_, as the Arrival of the _Galleons_ give in
_Spain_.




  CHAP. X.

_The Treaties and Negotiations the_ Five Nations _had with the_ English
_and_ French, _in the Years_ 1693 _and_ 1694.



As by this Time the Reader may be tired with the horrid Scenes of a
barbarous War, it may be some Relief to observe the _Indian_ Genius in
the Arts of negotiating; and see how a barbarous People, without any of
the Arts and Sciences in which we value our selves, manage their
Interest with the most learned, most polite, and artificial Nation in
_Europe_. The _Five Nations_ were informed, that the Governor of
_Canada_ had received from _Europe_ a very considerable Recruit of
Soldiers, and of all Sorts of Ammunition. This, with the great Loss the
_Mohawks_ had lately suffered, while they had been amused by the
_English_ with great Hopes, and very little real Assistance, made the
_Oneydoes_, at last yield to the Solicitations of the Jesuit _Milet_, to
send a Message to the _French_ for Peace. It is probable he had the Art
to influence the People at _Albany_ to favour his Designs, by giving
them Hopes of being included in the Peace, as may be conjectured, from
what will appear in the Sequel.

Coll. _Fletcher_ being informed, that the _Oneydoes_ had sent a
Messenger to _Canada_, sent for the _Five Nations_ to _Albany_. He spoke
to them the third of _July_ 1693.

He first excused his not meeting them as he had promised, at the Time
the Sap begins to run in the Trees, by Reason of his having received a
Commission to be Governor of _Pensilvania_, to which Place he was
obliged at that Time to go. He put them in Mind with what Speed he came
to their Assistance last Winter, and how effectual, in all Probability,
it would have been, had they only retarded the Enemy's March till he
could have reached them: He advised them to guard against being drunk,
and shewed them the ill Consequences of it in Time of War.

Then he said, "I have received Information, that some of the Brethren
are wavering, and inclined to Peace with the Enemy; and am assured,
that such Thoughts must arise from the Instigation of the Jesuit
_Milet_, whom some of the Brethren have suffered to live so long among
them, and whose only Practice is to delude and betray them. Let me
therefore advise you to remove that ill Person from among you."

In the End he condoled their Dead, and made them a very considerable
Present of ninety Guns, eight hundred and ten Pound of Powder, eight
hundred Bars of Lead, a Thousand Flints, eighty seven Hatchets, four
Gross of Knives, besides a considerable Quantity of Cloathing and
Provisions. This Present, he told them, their King and Queen had sent
them, and renewed the Covenant for all the _English_ Colonies.

The King usually sends them a considerable Present with every new
Governor sent to _New-York_, which is not always applied as it is
designed. If this Present had been made sooner, it had been of much more
Use to the _English_, as well as to the _Five Nations_.

The _Five Nations_ the next Day spoke as follows.

    Brother _Cayenguirago_,

    "We are involved in a bloody War, which makes us sit in Sorrow
    and Grief; and being about to speak of Matters of Importance,
    we, in the first Place, clear the Mouth and Throat of our
    Interpretess, by =giving her these three Bever Skins=."

Then they repeated his Excellency's Speech, in Answer to which they
said,

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, we rejoice, that the great King and
    Queen of _England_ take such Notice of us, as we find, by the
    large Present sent us; we return hearty Thanks for the
    Ammunition especially.

    "We are glad that our Brother _Cayenguirago_ renews the Chain,
    not only between us and this Government, but likewise with
    _New-England_, _Virginia_, _Maryland_ and _Pensilvania_; it
    shall be kept inviolable by us the _Five Nations_, as long as
    the Sun shines. We pray our Brother _Cayenguirago_ to have a
    watchful Eye, that none of the other Colonies keep any
    Correspondence with the Enemy, but use their Endeavours to
    destroy them. We heard nothing of what you told us of the Priest
    _Milet_, who lives at _Oneydo_, till we came to this Town. We
    have enquired the Truth of our Brethren the _Oneydoes_, who
    confess, that the Priest sent an _Indian_ to _Canada_ with
    Letters, which has surprised us very much.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, you are our great Tree, whose Roots
    extend to the utmost Bounds of this Government; we desire you
    may not be disturbed when any of our Prisoners misbehave, for
    they are not countenanced by us; and all proper Methods shall be
    taken, to prevent the like for the future. In like Manner we beg
    you to take Care, that none of the Prisoners you have correspond
    with the Enemy, as we suspect the Chevalier _D'O_. did; and that
    he was sent with Letters to _Canada_ by some of our Brethren.
    (He made his Escape from _Boston_.)

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, In former Times our Propositions to one
    another were only Discourses of Peace and Friendship, and in
    giving Presents; but how much is the Case altered of late? Now
    we talk of nothing but War, and are continually prompting one
    another to it. As to our Parts, we will keep close to the War to
    the last Drop of our Blood; and tho' we be tossed to and fro
    with Storms, we will remain stedfast to the last Man, as it was
    resolved by both in the Beginning of the War.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, we were told in our own Country, not
    only that the King had made you Governor of _Pensilvania_, but
    likewise that you were preparing a Fleet to take _Canada_. O!
    what joyful News this was to our young Men. _Sadagarus_, the
    great _Seneka_ Captain, was to command them. Now they said, we
    need only make one hearty Push, while the Fleet is before
    _Quebeck_. Now there will be an End to this bloody War, and all
    our Troubles; But alas, now we are come here, we hear not one
    Word of this Design.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, you are that flourishing Tree that
    covers us; you keep the Chain bright; we have one Request to
    make to you, that you may stay with us, and not return to
    _England_; for you know our Ways and Manners. If you have any
    Thing to tell the King and Queen, write it to them, for the King
    knows you to be a wise Man, and will therefore believe you.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, we are very glad to hear that
    _Pensilvania_ is come under your Government, bring their young
    Men here, with their Bows and Arrows and Hatchets in their
    Hands, for this is the Place of Action. We are pleased that the
    _Showonons_ or _Satanas_, who are our Enemies, have applied to
    you for Protection; and that you sent them to us to endeavour a
    Peace, and that you sent Christians with them, to conduct them
    back again. We wish they were come to assist us against the
    common Enemy.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_, now we have done, but must tell you
    again, that we roll and wallow in Joy, by Reason of the great
    Favour the great King and Queen has done us, in sending us Arms
    and Ammunition, at a Time when we are in the greatest Need of
    them; and because there is such Unity among the Brethren."

They made the Governor a considerable Present of Furs, to shew their
Respect to his Person; but they did not give one Belt to confirm any one
Article; so that the whole of it is, according to their Stile, only
argumentative.

Coll. _Fletcher_ not being satisfied with their Answer, concerning the
Jesuit _Milet_, made this further Proposal to them. "As to _Milet_ the
Priest, whom the Brethren of _Oneydo_ still harbour among them, I must
tell you again, that he betrays you, and all your Councils; and that you
may see I desire not to diminish your Number, I am willing to give you a
pretty _Indian_ Boy, in Lieu of the old Priest; and accordingly the Boy
was brought and delivered to them."

In answer to this the _Oneydo Sachem_ said, "As soon as the _Indian_
Messenger returns all his Papers shall be taken from him, and be
forthwith brought to our Brother _Cayenguirago_, before the Priest shall
see any of them: we are willing to take the Boy in Exchange for the
Priest, but it is not safe to do it, while our Messenger is in the Power
of the Enemy; let the Boy stay here till we bring the Priest, which
shall be as soon as the Messenger shall return". But he gave no Belt, or
other Present, to confirm this Promise. He added,

"Brother _Cayenguirago_, we now acquaint you that it is proposed by all
the _Five Nations_, to make Peace with the _Dionondadies_, a Nation of
_Indians_ near in Alliance with the _French_ of _Canada_. This will both
strengthen us and weaken the Enemy. The _Senekas_, who live nearest
them, have undertaken this Treaty, and take Belts of Wampum from the
other Nations, to confirm the Peace. We desire your Approbation, that
you would send your Belt in Concurrence, as our eldest Brother in our
Chain."

The Governor approved of this, and =gave them a Belt= to carry in his
Name.

Notwithstanding what the Speaker of the _Five Nations_ had promised to
the Governor, to bring all the Papers the _Oneydo_ Messenger should
bring from _Canada_, before the Jesuit _Milet_ should have Liberty to
see them, it could not be difficult for the Jesuit, to persuade them to
keep the Power of making Peace in their own Hands, and for that Purpose,
to call a Meeting of the _Sachems_ of _Onondago_, where all such Matters
had been formerly transacted among themselves, and there to determine
independently, rather than to submit themselves to another Nation at
_Albany_. They only invited the _English_ to assist at the general
Council. The _English_ used what Arguments they could to dissuade this
Meeting, but rather to observe the Promise made to the Governor; and it
seems used some Threatning. The _Mohawks_ had so much Regard to the
_English_, that they refused to assist at the Council. The other four,
notwithstanding this, met, and resolved on an Answer to be sent to the
Governor of _Canada_; but at the same Time, to shew their Regard to the
_Mohawks_ and _English_, these Resolutions were not to be final, till
they should first be communicated to the _English_ and _Mohawks_, and
their Advice received thereon; for which Purpose several _Sachems_ were
sent to _Albany_, of whom _Decanesora_ was the Principal and the
Speaker.

_Decanesora_ had for many Years the greatest Reputation among the _Five
Nations_ for speaking, and was generally employed as their Speaker, in
their Negotiations with both _French_ and _English_: He was grown old
when I saw him, and heard him speak; he had a great Fluency in speaking,
and a graceful Elocution, that would have pleased in any Part of the
World. His Person was tall and well made, and his Features, to my
thinking, resembled much the Bustos of _Cicero_. I shall give an Account
of these Negotiations from _Decanesora_'s Mouth, because his Narration
agrees in the main with the Account the _French_ give of them, and
carries along with it as strong Evidences of Truth, as that of the
_French_ do: but the chief Reason is, that I intend to give the Reader
as perfect a Notion as I can of the _Indian_ Genius; and here it will
appear, what Art _Decanesora_ had, to make an Account of an Affair less
disagreeable to _English_ Ears, which had been undertaken against their
Advice, and contrary to their Interest.

_Decanesora_ spoke to Major _Schuyler_ (_Quider_) and the Magistrates of
_Albany_, the second of _February_ 1693-4 as follows.

    "Brother _Cayenguirago_[38], we are come to acquaint you, that
    our Children the _Oneydoes_ having of themselves sent a
    Messenger to _Canada_, he has brought back with him a Belt of
    Peace from the Governor of _Canada_.

    "As soon as _Tariha_ (the Messenger) arrived at _Canada_, he was
    asked, where the six hundred Men were that were to attack
    _Canada_, as they had been informed by _Cariokese_ a _Mohawk_
    Deserter? He assured them there was no such Design.

    "He was carried to _Quebeck_, where he delivered his Belt, with
    the following Propositions. _Onondio_, if you would have Peace
    go to _Albany_, and ask it there, for the _Five Nations_ will do
    nothing without _Cayenguirago_. The Governor of _Canada_ was
    angry at this, and said, he had nothing to do with the Governor
    of _New-York_, he would treat only with the _Five Nations_; the
    Peace between the Christians must be made on the other Side the
    great Lake. He added, he was sorry to see the _Five Nations_ so
    far degenerated, as to take a sixth Nation into their Chain, to
    rule over them. If you had desired me to come and treat in any
    of your Castles, I would have done it; but to tell me I must go
    to _Albany_, is to desire of me what I can by no Means do. You
    have done very ill, to suffer the People of _New-York_ to
    govern you so far, that you dare do nothing without their
    Consent. I advise you to send two of each Nation to me, and let
    _Decanesora_ be one of them. I have Orders from the King my
    Master to grant you Peace, if you come in your proper Persons to
    ask it. The Governor of _Canada_ afterwards said,

    "Children of the _Five Nations_, I have Compassion for your
    little Children, therefore come speedily, and speak of Peace to
    me, otherwise I'll stop my Ears for the future: By all Means let
    _Decanesora_ come; for if the _Mohawks_ come alone, I will not
    hear them, some of all the _Five Nations_ must come. Now
    _Tariha_ return home, and tell the _Five Nations_, that I will
    wait for their coming till the Trees bud, and the Bark can be
    parted from the Trees. I design for _France_ in the Spring, and
    I leave a Gentleman to command here, to whom I have given Orders
    to raise Soldiers, if you do not come in that Time, and then
    what will become of you? I am truly grieved to see the _Five
    Nations_ so debauched and deceived by _Cayenguirago_, who is
    lately come to _New-York_, and by _Quider_. Formerly the chief
    Men of the _Five Nations_ used to converse with me; but this
    Governor of _New-York_ has so deluded you, that you hearken to
    none but him; but take Care of what will follow, if you hearken
    to none but him."

Then _Decanesora_ excused the not sending the Letters to _Albany_, which
came by _Tariha_, as they had promised, saying, the other Nations
trusted this to the _Oneydoes_, because the Messenger was to return to
them, and the _Oneydoes_ deceived the others. He likewise excused their
not coming to _Albany_ as soon as _Tariha_ returned, which was in
_November_. He said the chief _Sachem_ of the _Onondagas_, who was
entrusted (as their Speaker) by the _Five Nations_ with their general
Affairs, by the general Council of _Onondaga_, had a sore Leg, and could
not travel[39].

That in such Case he (_Decanesora_) did all that was in his Power, that
is, he called a Council at _Onondaga_, to give Directions in this
Affair; and that he invited _Quider_ to this Council. He continued,

    "The four Nations that met there resolved to send Deputies to
    _Canada_, and that I _Decanesora_ was to be one of them; but at
    the same Time ordered me, with some others, to communicate the
    Resolutions of the General Council to our Brethren at _Albany_,
    and to the _Mohawks_, to be farther advised by them.

    "The Resolutions are, to =send three Belts= to the Governor of
    _Canada_, with the following Propositions.

           *     *     *     *     *

    "I. _Onondio_, you have sent for me often, and as often asked,
    why I am afraid to come? The great Kettle of War that you have
    hung over the Fire is the Reason of it. Then laying down the
    first Belt, I am to ask his Consent to the other two Belts which
    I still keep in my Hand.

    "II. We now not only throw down the Kettle, and thereby throw
    the boiling Water out of it, but likewise break it to Pieces,
    that it may never be hanged up again by this second Belt.

    "III. Hearken, _Onondio_, you are sent from the _French_ King,
    your Master, as _Cayenguirago_ is from the great King and Queen
    of _England_. What I am now about to speak to you, is by
    Inspiration from the great God of Heaven. You say that you will
    have nothing to do with our Brethren of _Cayenguirago_, but I
    must tell you, that we are inseparable, we can have no Peace
    with you so long as you are at War with them; we must stand and
    fall with them; which I am to confirm, by laying down the third
    Belt.

           *     *     *     *     *

    "When this was concluded the Jesuit _Milet_, and another
    _French_ Gentleman (who had been taken Prisoner, and was taken
    into the Place of the chief _Sachem of Onondaga_, formerly lost
    in the War, and thereby became a _Sachem_) desired Leave to add
    two Belts to the other three. By their being _Sachems_ they had
    a Vote in the General Council, and a Right to propose any Thing.
    They wrote and read to us the Purports of their Belts, and we
    have brought their Papers with us, to shew to our Brethren."

To shew the Necessity they were under of making Peace, speedily he
added:

"That two Women, who were Prisoners at _Canada_, had made their Escape,
on Purpose to inform them that the _French_ were making great
Preparations of Battoes, and other Necessaries for an Expedition; one
said, she had informed one of the _Sachems_ of the _Praying Indians_ of
her Design, who sent an _Indian_ with her to advise the _Five Nations_,
to prevent the great Danger they were threatened with by a speedy
Conclusion of the Peace; and added, that they had sent one of their
People back with this _Praying Indian_, to assure them that Deputies
would certainly go to _Canada_ in the Spring to treat of Peace." I make
no Doubt, this was only an Article to hasten the _Five Nations_ to
conclude the Peace, lest the _English_, if it were delayed, should find
Means to prevent it. Then he shewed the Flag which the Governor of
_Canada_ sent them to be carried by their Deputies, that the _French_
might know them. Upon these Resolutions being taken, the _Five Nations_
recalled six hundred Men, that they had placed along _Cadarackui River_,
to intercept the _French_, as they passed to and from _Missilimakinak_.

The Jesuit's Papers being read to them, several Things were found in
them which he had not read to the General Council. To this _Decanesora_
answered; "We know that the Priest favours his own Nation, and deceives
us in many Things; but it is not in his Power to alter our Affection to
our Brethren, we wish you would bury all Misunderstandings that you have
conceived on his Account; and we likewise wish you gave less Credit to
the Rum-Carriers than you do."

Here we see, by this Appellation, what a contemptible Character the
Traders have among the _Indians_, and yet the Government of _New-York_
has almost perpetually trusted the Management of the _Indian_ Affairs to
these Traders.

_Decanesora_ ended his Conference as follows:

    "The Governor of _Canada_'s Words, and the Resolutions of the
    four Nations are now before you, consult therefore what is to be
    done, and if it be necessary for the Brethren to go to our
    Castles to advise us farther, be not unwilling; and then he laid
    down a large Belt eleven Rows deep, and seven Fathom of Wampum."

The next Day Major _Schuyler_ told them that he could consent to no
Treaty with the _French_; but proposed to them to meet the Governor here
in seventy Days, and that _Decanesora_ in particular should return at
that Time, and gave a Belt.

They agreed to meet the Governor at that Time;

    "But as for myself (says _Decanesora_) I cannot promise; I am
    now the Minister of the General Council, and cannot dispose of
    myself, but by their Directions; if they order me, I shall
    willingly return. We did not expect to hear such positive
    Prohibition of keeping any Correspondence with the _French_;
    seventy Days must pass before we meet again, if any Mischief be
    done by the Enemy in that Time, let us not blame one another.
    Consider again what is most for the publick Good, and let it be
    spoken before we part, and laid down a large Belt of fourteen
    deep."

Major _Schuyler_ then asked them again, whether they promised to stop
all Correspondence with the _French_, either by the Jesuit or otherwise,
for seventy Days, and till they shall have his Excellency the Governor's
Answer.

_Decanesora_ answered to this, "I have no Authority to answer this
Question. I shall lay the Belt down in every one of the Castles, and
tell, that by it all Correspondence is desired to stop with the
_French_; but I cannot promise that this will be complied with."

Major _Schuyler_ on the sixth called the _Indians_ again together: He
advised them not to submit to, nor trust such a perfidious Nation as the
_French_ are, who have upon all Occasions proved themselves such. Be not
discouraged, (says he, =giving a Belt=) Heaven begins again to favour us.
This Day the Forerunners of the _Shawonons_ are come to Town, seven
Nations are on their March following them, one Thousand in Number,
including Men, Women and Children, as you may learn from their own
Mouths. Take Courage, and be not afraid, =giving five Fathom of Wampum=.
This seemed a lucky Incident, and accordingly it had more Influence than
all other Arguments together.

_Decanesora_, the next Day, called the Magistrates together, and told
them, you have at last shut up the Way to _Canada_, but we have one
Thing to ask, after mature Deliberation, which we expect will not be
refused us. Major _Schuyler_ assured them that every Thing should be
granted, which was either for their Safety or Honour. We desire then,
said he, that you send a Messenger along with ours to the _Praying
Indians_ at _Canada_, to tell them that the Priest is false; that we
are to meet _Cayenguirago_ in the Spring, and therefore cannot go to
_Canada_ at that Time; and that a further Cessation of Arms be agreed
to, till such Time as we can go. We desire at least, that if you will
not send a Messenger, that you put the Message in Writing, as a Token of
your Assent to it. This last was agreed to, and the Message was put in
Writing in the following Words, and translated into _French_.

       *     *     *     *     *

The =Dispatch of three Belts=, which two Messengers of the _Five Nations_
carry to the _Caraguists_ and Catholick _Indians_, according to what was
resolved by the _Agayandres_ or _Sachems_ of the _Five Nations_, at
_Albany_, _February_ the ninth 1694.

  _First Belt_.

The _Agayandres_ of the _Five Nations_ cannot go to _Canada_ in the
Spring, as they gave Reason to expect by the last Message from
_Onondaga_, because _Cayenguirago_ has called all the _Five Nations_,
and other _Indians_, to meet him at _Albany_, in the Month of _April_
next, to which the _Five Nations_ have agreed.

  _Second Belt_.

If the _Caraguists_, or _French_, have any Thing to propose to the _Five
Nations_, they may safely come into our Country. This Belt opens the
Path, and secures it to them both coming and going.

  _Third Belt_.

The _Five Nations_, and their Friends, lay down the Hatchet till they
shall have an Answer, which they expect in forty Days. Provided
nevertheless, that the _Caraguists_ and _French_ tye their Hatchets down
at the same Time.

       *     *     *     *     *

These Belts were accordingly presented to the _Praying Indians_ of
_Cahnuaga_, who refused to receive them but in the Presence of Mr. _de
Callieres_, Governor of _Montreal_. Mr. _de Callieres_ acquainted the
Count _de Frontenac_ with the Contents. After which the _Praying
Indians_, in Presence of Mr. _de Callieres_, gave the following Answer.

    "We will have no Correspondence with the _Five Nations_, but by
    Order of the Governor of _Canada_ our Father, and unless
    _Decanesora_, and the other Deputies, come before the Feast of
    St. _John_, the Way will be shut up for ever after, and our
    Father's Ears will be stopt. We however assure you, that if the
    Deputies come in that Time the Path shall be safe both coming
    and going."

Whether the Accounts given of the coming of the _Shawonons_ was only an
Amusement, or whether they were diverted on their March, I know not, for
I find no farther Account of them in the Register of the _Indian_
Affairs: However it was, the Impression made on the _Indians_ by that
News, was not sufficient to withstand the Force of the resolute Answer
their Messenger received from the _Praying Indians_. _Decanesora_ and
the other Deputies went early in the Spring to _Canada_; the other
_Sachems_ met Colonel _Fletcher_ at _Albany_, the fourth of _May_ 1694.
The _Indians_ spoke first by _Sadakanahtie_, an _Onondaga Sachem_, as
follows:

    "_Brother_ Cayenguirago,

    "Some of our _Sachems_ agreed last Winter that we should keep no
    Correspondence with the _French_; we confess that we have broke
    that Promise, and that we have received a Messenger from
    _Canada_, and have sent our Deputies likewise thither. The Belt
    is not yet arrived, by which we are to acknowledge our Fault in
    doing this. The Reason of our doing it is truly this, we are
    afraid of the Enemy.

    "When a Messenger came last Year from _Canada_ to _Onondaga_,
    our Brother _Cayenguirago_ discharged our Meeting in General
    Council at _Onondaga_, to consult on that Message, and ordered
    us to hold our General Council here at _Albany_ on that Affair.
    The Privilege of meeting in General Council, when we please, is
    a Privilege we always have enjoyed; no former Governor, of the
    Name of _Corlear_, ever obstructed this Privilege. We planted a
    Tree of Peace in this Place with them, its Roots and Branches
    extend as far as _Virginia_ and _New-England_, and we have
    reposed with Pleasure under its Shade. Brother, let us keep to
    that first Tree, and let us be united and unanimous; such
    Prohibition of our Assemblies will be of ill Consequence, and
    occasion Differences between us.

    "We acknowledge, I say, our sending Agents to _Canada_ for
    Peace, we were incouraged in doing this, by the Knowledge we
    have of the Governor of _Canada_. He is an old Man, and was
    formerly Governor of that Place. He was always esteemed a wise
    peaceable Man, and therefore we trust our Message will have a
    good Issue. We did not take it amiss that you sent to the
    _Dewagunhas_, nor that _Arnout_ was sent to the _Satanas_, both
    of them our Enemies; and, for the same Reason, our Brother
    _Cayenguirago_ ought not to be displeased with our sending to
    the _French_ for Peace.

    "We, _Onondagas_, acknowledge ourselves to have been the chief
    Promoters of this Message, we have sent in all nine _Sachems_
    with nine Belts. It is true we are now under much Uneasiness in
    having trusted so many _Sachems_ in the _French_ Hands, being
    almost half the Number we have in our Nation, but we were in
    haste to prevent the Designs the _French_ had against our
    Countries and yours, by the great warlike Preparations they were
    making in _Canada_."

Then he told all the Orders and Directions which their Ambassadors had
received; which agreeing with the Account which _Decanesora_ gave of his
Negotiation, I shall here pass over. He finished all by =giving a Belt=.

Colonel _Fletcher_ told them, he would give no Answer to what they had
said, before they discovered to him what Reason they had to say, that he
had forbid their holding any Assembly at _Onondaga_, and that he had
made Peace with the _Dewagunhas_ and _Satanas_, without their Consent
and Concurrence.

To this the Speaker the next Day answered; "I was sick, and absent when
the Affairs you mention were transacted, and I was at a Loss how to
excuse our sending to the _French_ contrary to your Advice; but several
_Sachems_ being arrived since I spoke, I have been better informed by
them, who were present at those Transactions. We find it, in every
Circumstance, as our Brother _Cayenguirago_ says; that you did not
obstruct our keeping General Councils at _Onondaga_, but only cautioned
us in hearkening to the Fallacies of the _French_, and in holding
Meetings on that Occasion. We assure you we will never separate from
you, we still have one Head, one Blood, one Soul, and one Heart with
you; and as a Confirmation of this I =give this Belt seven deep=.

"As to the _Dewagunhas_ and _Shawonons_, we are confident _Cayenguirago_
will not admit them into his Government, till they have made Peace with
us, which we shall willingly grant. When our Enemies are humbled, and
beg Peace, why should they not have it? Let them come and live with us,
it will strengthen our Country.

"Brother _Cayenguirago_, when the Christians first arrived in this
Country, we received them kindly. When they were but a small People, we
entered into a League with them, to guard them from all Enemies
whatsoever. We were so fond of their Society, that we tied the great
Canoe which brought them, not with a Rope made of Bark to a Tree, but
with a strong iron Chain fastened to a great Mountain. Now before the
Christians arrived, the General Council of the _Five Nations_ was held
at _Onondaga_, where there has, from the Beginning, a continual Fire
been kept burning; it is made of two great Logs, whose Fire never
extinguishes. As soon as the Hatchet-makers (their general Name for
Christians) arrived, this General Council at _Onondaga_ planted this
Tree at _Albany_, whose Roots and Branches have since spread as far as
_New-England_, _Connecticut, Pensilvania, Maryland_ and _Virginia_; and
under the Shade of this Tree all these _English_ Colonies have
frequently been sheltered. Then (=giving seven Fathom of Wampum=) he
renewed the Chain, and promised, as they likewise expected, mutual
Assistance, in Case of any Attack from any Enemy.

"The only Reason, to be plain with you, continued he, of our sending to
make Peace with the _French_, is the low Condition to which we are
reduced, while none of our Neighbours send us the least Assistance, so
that the whole Burthen of the War lyes on us alone. Our Brethren of
_New-England, Connecticut_, _Pensilvania, Maryland_ and _Virginia_, of
their own accord thrust their Arms into our Chain; but since the War
began we have received no Assistance from them. We alone cannot continue
the War against the _French_, by Reason of the Recruits they daily
receive from the other Side the great Lake.

"Brother _Cayenguirago_, speak from your Heart, are you resolved to
prosecute the War vigorously against the _French_, and are your
Neighbours of _Virginia, Maryland, Pensilvania, Connecticut_ and
_New-England_, resolved to assist us? If it be so, we assure you,
notwithstanding any Treaty hitherto entered into, we will prosecute the
War as hotly as ever. But if our Neighbours will not assist, we must
make Peace, and we submit it to your Consideration, by =giving this great
Belt fifteen deep=.

"Brother _Cayenguirago_, I have truly told you the Reasons which have
induced us to offer Peace to the _French_; we shall likewise, from the
Bottom of our Hearts, inform you of the Design we have in this Treaty.
When the Governor of _Canada_ shall have accepted the nine Belts, of
which I have just now told you, then we shall have something more to say
by two large Belts, which lye still hid in our Bosom. We shall lay down
first one and say, We have a Brother _Cayenguirago_, with whose People
we have been united in one Chain from the Beginning, they must be
included in this Treaty; we cannot see them involved in bloody War,
while we sit in easy Peace. If the Governor of _Canada_ answer, that he
has made a separate Peace with us, and that he cannot make any Peace
with _Cayenguirago_, because the War is from over the great Lake; then
we shall lay down the second great broad Belt, and tell the Governor of
_Canada_, if you will not include _Cayenguirago_'s People, the Treaty
will become thereby void, as if it had never been made; and if he
persists, we will absolutely leave him."

While the _Sachems_ were at _Albany_, _Decanesora_ and the other
Ambassadors arrived at the Castle of the _Praying Indians_, near the
Falls above _Montreal_. They were conducted from thence, by the Superior
of the Jesuits, to _Quebeck_. They had their Audience of the Governor of
_Canada_ with great Solemnity, in the Presence of all the Ecclesiasticks
and Officers of Distinction, and of the most considerable _Indians_ then
in the Place. They were every Day, while they staid in the Place,
entertained at the Governor's Table, or at the Tables of the most
considerable Officers. _Decanesora_ on his Side made a good Appearance,
being cloathed in Scarlet trim'd with Gold, and with a laced Bever Hat
on his Head, which had been given him by Colonel _Fletcher_ before he
went.

The Jesuit _Milet_ had by Letter informed the Governor of every Thing in
their Commission, and though he was thereby enabled to have answered
them immediately, he consulted three Days, after the Ambassadors had
delivered what they had to say, before he would return an Answer, that
it might appear with more Solemnity. The _Indians_ never return a sudden
Answer on any Occasion of Importance, however resolved they be
beforehand, and despise those that do, though their Answer be never so
much to the Purpose. I choose to give an Account of this from
_Decanesora_'s Mouth, as I did of the former, and for the same Reason.
The Account given of it by the _Indians_ agrees, in all the material
Points, with that published by the _French_, and I am confident it is
not less genuine.

Colonel _Fletcher_ being sensible of what Consequence this Treaty
between the _French_ and _Five Nations_ might be of to all the _English_
Colonies, gave them Notice of it, and informed them of the Reasons which
had induced the _Indians_ to enter into it. He told them, there was no
Possibility of preventing it, but by the _Indians_ being assured of more
effectual Assistance, than they had hitherto received, and advised them
to send Commissioners for that Purpose to _Albany_ in _August_, at which
Time he intended to meet the _Five Nations_ there, after the Return of
their Messengers from _Canada_. Accordingly, _Andrew Hamilton_, Esq;
Governor of _New-Jersey_, Colonel _John Pinchon_, _Samuel Sands_, Esq;
and Major _Pen Townsend_, Commissioners from _Massachuset's Bay_, and
Colonel _John Hauley_ and Captain _Stanley_, Commissioners from
_Connecticut_, waited on Colonel _Fletcher_ at _Albany_, who carried
with him likewise a Part of the Council of _New-York_.

These Gentlemen having met the _Indians_ at _Albany_ the fifteenth of
_August_, _Decanesora_ rose up first, and desired Leave to sing a Song
or two of Peace, before they began on Business. Then _Rode_, a _Mohawk
Sachem_, rose up, and addressing himself to the other _Sachems_, said,
we have great Reason to rejoice, seeing so many of those, who are in our
Chain, are now met, to consult together on the general Weal; after which
they sang two or three Songs.

_Sadakanahtie_ being chosen Speaker for that Day, rose up, spoke much to
the same Purpose as he had done to Colonel _Fletcher_ in _May_ last;
giving a metaphorical Account of their League with the _English_, how it
began, and by what Steps it had been inlarged and strengthened; how the
other Colonies had thrust their Arms into this Chain, but had given
little or no Assistance against the common Enemy. "Our Brother
_Cayenguirago_'s Arms (says he) and ours are stiff, and tired with
holding fast the Chain, whilst our Neighbours sit still and smoak at
their Ease. The Fat is melted from our Flesh, and fallen on our
Neighbours, who grow fat while we grow lean: They flourish while we
decay.

"This Chain made us the Envy of the _French_, and if all had held it as
fast as _Cayenguirago_, it would have been a Terror also. If we would
all heartily join and take the Hatchet in our Hand, our common Enemy
would soon be destroyed, and we should for ever after live in Peace and
Ease. Do you but your Parts, and Thunder itself cannot break our Chain."

Then he mentioned some Jealousies they had entertained of _New-England_,
by their suffering the Chevalier _D'O_ to escape to _Canada_, which they
suspected had been concerted between him and the People of
_New-England_, in Order to treat of Peace. "Our Agents, said he, saw the
Chevalier _D'O_ at _Canada_, who told them that he had been set at
Liberty by the _English_, and that it was in vain that the _Five
Nations_ warred against the _French_, while the _English_ favoured
them." On this Occasion he shewed them a Fish painted on Paper, which
the Commissioners of _New-England_ had given them, when they first
entered into the Chain, as a Seal to the League.

He finished by telling them, that they would next Day give all the
Particulars of their Negotiation in _Canada_.

The next Day _Decanesora_ proceeded to the Account of his Negotiation,
as follows: "The Governor of _Canada_ having often sent to us to come to
_Canada_ to treat with him, we went thither, and told him that we were
come to treat of Peace. We made the following Proposals.

"Father, if we do not conclude a Peace now, it will be your Fault; for
we have already taken the Hatchet out of the Hands of the _River
Indians_ (_Hudson_'s River) whom we incited to the War. But we must tell
you, that you are an ill Man, you are inconstant and not to be trusted;
we have had War together a long Time, and though you occasioned the War,
we never hated the House of _Oghessa_, (a Gentleman living at
_Montreal_) let him undertake the toilsome Journey to _Onondaga_; for if
he will he shall be welcome.

"Father, we are now speaking of Peace, and therefore I must speak a Word
to the _Praying Indians_, and first to those of _Cahnuaga_ (chiefly
_Mohawks_) you know our Customs and Manners, therefore make _Onondio_
acquainted therewith, and be assisting in the prosecuting of this good
Work. Then to the other Castle, called _Canassadaga_, (chiefly
_Onondagas_) you are worse than the _French_ themselves, you deserted
from us, and side with our Enemies to destroy us; make some amends now,
by forwarding Peace.

"You have almost eat us up, our best Men are killed in this bloody War;
but we now forget what is past. Before this we once threw the Hatchet
into the River of _Kaihohage_[40], but you fished it up, and
treacherously surprised our People at _Cadarackui_. After this you sent
to us to have our Prisoners restored; then the Hatchet was thrown up to
the Sky, but you kept a String fastened to the Helve, and pulled it
down, and fell upon our People again. This we revenged to some Purpose,
by the Destruction of your People and Houses in the Island of
_Montreal_.

"Now we are come to cover the Blood from our Sight, which has been shed
by both Sides during this long War.

"_Onondio_, we have been at War a long Time, we now give you a Medicine
to drive away all ill Thoughts from your Heart, to purge it and make it
clean, and restore it to its former State.

"_Onondio_, we will not permit any Settlement at _Cadarackui_; you have
had your Fire there thrice extinguished; we will not consent to your
rebuilding that Fort, but the Passage through the River shall be free
and clear. We make the Sun clean, and drive away all Clouds and
Darkness, that we may see the Light without Interruption.

"_Onondio_, we have taken many Prisoners from one another, during the
War. The Prisoners we took have been delivered, according to our Custom,
to the Families that have lost any in the War. They no longer belong to
the Publick, they may give them back if they please, your People may do
the same. We have brought back two Prisoners, and restore them to you.

"After I had finished what I had to say, continued he, the Governor of
_Canada_ told me, that he would not make Peace with _Cayenguirago_. To
this I answered, these Words displease me much, you shall keep Peace
with him. _Onondio_ said again, I must fight with _Cayenguirago_, it is
not in my Power to make Peace; this can only be done by my Master, who
lives over the great Water. To this I replied, I cannot bear this
Discourse; if you should fight him now, and not stay till I get Home,
all the Country will look on me as a Traytor; I can treat with you no
longer. The Argument on this Subject lasted three Days, at last the
Governor of _Canada_ assured me, that he would not undertake any
Enterprize against _Cayenguirago_ this Summer, but would wait to hear
what he wou'd say.

"The Governor of _Canada_ insisted three Days to have Hostages left,
which I refused, but two agreeing of their own accord to stay, they were
left, _viz_. one an _Onondago_, another a _Seneka_.

"Then the Governor of _Canada_ made the following publick Answer:

    "I. I accept of Peace as you offer.

    "II. Son, bring all the Prisoners back that you have taken from me,
    and yours shall have Liberty to return Home, if they please.

    "III. Children, erect my Fire again at _Cadarackui_, and plant
    there the Tree of Peace.

"After this the Governor of _Canada_ delivered me a Belt, which I now
lay down before you; by it he said, desire _Cayenguirago_ to send a wise
Man to me, and he shall have Protection according to the Custom of
Christians; and added,

"Children of the _Five Nations_, if _Cayenguirago_ shall employ you to
do any Service for him, do not accept of it, let him send his own
People."

_Decanesora_ added, that the Governor of _Canada_ had fixed eighty Days
for a Return to this Belt.

He continued and said, "The _Sachems_ of the _Dionondadies_ were
present; after I had finished my Speech, they said; May what you have
now said be from your Hearts; we suspect you are not sincere; let us no
longer feel the Smart of the Hatchet, and gave this Belt which I now lay
down.

"The _Praying Indians_ next said, Brethren, our Father _Onondio_ has
told you to bring Home all the Prisoners, do not fail in this; =giving
two Belts=.

"Brother _Cayenguirago_, you will find what I have now said confirmed by
this Paper, which the Governor of _Canada_ gave me. I brought Letters
likewise for the Jesuit _Milet_, who was to read the Paper to us." The
Paper contained the Articles in _French_, in which the Governor of
_Canada_ was willing to make Peace.

But besides what _Decanesora_ here tells, the _French_ Accounts say,
that he brought two Belts underground (that is privately) from three
_Onondaga Sachems_, to assure the Governor of _Canada_ of their
particular Affection, which the Governor of _Canada_ answered, by a
private Belt to them.

As soon as _Decanesora_ had done speaking, Colonel _Fletcher_ rejected
the Belt sent by the Governor of _Canada_, saying; If the Governor of
_Canada_ have any Thing to say to me, let him send some of his People to
_Albany_, and they shall have Protection.

Next Day _Sadekanahtie_, after he had sung a long Song, gave the
following Account of their Negotiations with the _Dewagunhas_ and
_Dionondadies_, which they had undertaken by the Governor's Advice.

    "We were afraid, says he, to send Messengers of our own People,
    and therefore we employed two Prisoners we had of the
    _Dionondadies_ with the Governor's Belt. Some time after this,
    some of the _Senekas_ hunting near the _Dionondadies_, two of
    them were taken; but when they were carried to the _Dionondadie_
    Castle, they were not treated like Prisoners; they were used
    kindly, and sent back with the following Offers of Peace.

    "We are glad to see you Face to Face to speak to you, since the
    Sun has been so propitious to send home the Men that were
    Prisoners with you, giving a few Strings of Wampum.

    "We are glad of this Opportunity to tell you, that we have been
    both drunk in making War on one another; we now give you a
    Cordial to ease your Hearts, that there be no longer War between
    us, by =this Belt=.

    "We are glad that you have set the Doors open as far as
    _Cayenguirago_'s House, that we may freely go thither. Carry him
    =this second Belt=.

    "Brethren, we thank you for having prepared a Place for us at
    your General Council of _Onondaga_. Our Country is every where
    free to you to treat with us, by =this third Belt=.

    "Brethren, our whole Country rejoiced when you invited us into
    your Country, and from thence to go where _Cayenguirago_ dwells;
    be not afraid to come to our Country, you shall meet with no
    Molestation.

    "Brethren, we thank you for putting us in Mind of what was
    formerly agreed to, _viz_. that when any ill Accident happens,
    we were to meet together to compose Matters, and not to revenge
    it with War. We are now together to put an End to all
    Misunderstanding, by =this fourth Belt=.

    "Brethren, (we include all the Nations from the _Senekas_
    Country to _New-York_ in this Name) hearken to us. We rend the
    Clouds asunder, and drive away all Darkness from the Heavens,
    that the Sun of Peace may shine with Brightness over us all;
    =giving a Sun= of a round red polished Stone.

    "Brethren, we put the Hatchet into the Hands of the
    _Chightaghies_, _Twithtwies_, and _Odsirachies_, to war against
    you; but we shall in three Days go to these Nations and take the
    Hatchet out of their Hands; =giving half a Stone Pipe=.

    "You _Senekas_ are stupid Creatures, we must therefore warn you
    not to hunt so far from your Castles, lest you be hurt by any of
    these three Nations, and then blame us. They then =gave the other
    half of the Pipe=.

    "But Brother _Cayenguirago_, says _Sadakahnitie_, do not suffer
    these Nations to come nearer than the _Senekas_ Country, lest
    they discover our Weakness, and to what a low Condition the War
    has reduced us. These Nations have been so long in Friendship
    with the _French_, and are so much under their Influence, that
    we cannot trust them yet, or be too much upon our Guard against
    them."

Colonel _Fletcher_ not being able to give the _Five Nations_ any
Assurance of a vigorous Assistance, he called the principal _Sachems_ to
a private Conference on the twentieth. He asked them, whether they had
made Peace with the Governor of _Canada_; they answered, that it only
wanted his Approbation, and added, that they could no longer carry on
the War without Assistance. You have the whole Negotiations before you,
say they, and we submit it to your Prudence.

He then allowed them to make Peace, provided they kept faithful in their
Chain with the _English_; but told them, that as to his Part he could
make no Peace with the Governor of _Canada_. They were under great
Uneasiness to leave their Friends in the War, they said, and wished,
since neither the Governor of _Canada_ nor he would receive Proposals by
their Hands, that they might think of some neutral Place to treat. The
Governor answered, that he could neither receive nor send any Message on
that Head; and that Peace could be only made between them by the two
Kings.

The Governor next asked them, whether they would permit the _French_ to
build again at _Cadarackui_; they answered, they would never permit it,
and were resolved to insist on it, in all the ensuing Treaties, that he
never shall. Then the Governor added, if you permit the French to build
any where on that Lake, there will be an End to your Liberty, your
Posterity will become Slaves to the _French_. If ever you should permit
them, I will look on it as an absolute Breach of the Chain with us: If
the _French_ attempt it give me Notice, and I will march the whole Force
of my Government to your Assistance. We shall find afterwards, however,
that the Government of _New-York_ was far from making good this Promise.

The Governor told them, that they had lost much of their Honour in
creeping to the _French_, in such an abject Manner; for, says he, the
Governor of _Canada_'s Paper, which you brought with you, says, that you
came in the most humble and penitent Manner, and begged Peace. To which
they answered, the Governor of _Canada_ has no Reason to make such
Reflexions, we have many of his Belts to shew, by which he again and
again sued to us for Peace, before we would hearken to him. But, replies
the Governor, how came you to call him Father? For no other Reason, they
replied, but because he calls us Children. These Names signify nothing.

They desired the Governor not to say any Thing particularly of
_Cadarackui_, in his publick Speech that he was to make next Day, for
they had, they said, some among them that would tell all to the Governor
of _Canada_; and concluded, with wishing that they had some one, who
could write and read all that the Governor had said to them, that they
might not forget any Part of it, when they come to consult and resolve
on this weighty Affair, at their General Council at _Onondaga_.

Here we see these Barbarians, these Savages, as we call them, acting
with the greatest regard to the Treaties they had entered into with
their Allies, and that at a Time when the Exigences of their own
Affairs, and when the faint feeble Assistance, which their Allies had
contributed in the common Cause, would, among Christian Potentates, have
been thought a sufficient Excuse for their taking Care of themselves
separately, in breach of the most solemn Confederacy they could enter
into.

The _Sachems_ of the _Five Nations_ being met at _Onondaga_, to consult
on the Terms offered by the _French_, they were divided in their
Opinions; the _Cayugas_, and Part of the _Senekas_, were most favourable
to the _French_ Proposals; but the major Part was absolutely against
allowing the _French_ to rebuild a Fort at _Cadarackui_, nor would they
consent to include all the _French_ Allies in the Treaty, with some of
which they had particular Causes of Animosity.

The Party that was most for Peace obtained Leave to go to _Canada_, to
try whether they could obtain Terms less disagreeable. They accordingly
went thither, within the Time prefixed by the Governor of _Canada_, for
an Answer; and to make themselves more acceptable to the _French_, they
carried thirteen Prisoners with them, and delivered them up. The Jesuit
_Milet_ was of this Number, who had been taken in the Year 1689, and one
_Jonscaire_, who had been long a Prisoner among the _Senekas_: He had
been delivered up to a Family of the _Senekas_, that had lost some
considerable Relation, and was by them adopted. He ingratiated himself
so much with that Nation, that he was advanced to the Rank of a
_Sachem_, and preserved their Esteem to the Day of his Death; whereby
he became, after the general Peace, very useful to the _French_ in all
Negotiations with the _Five Nations_, and to this Day they shew their
Regard to his Family and Children.

When the Governor of _Canada_ came to Particulars with these Deputies,
he could obtain nothing but ambiguous or dubious Answers, as to the
rebuilding of _Cadarackui Fort_, and the including of all the _French_
Allies in the Peace. Whereupon he dismissed them with Presents, and made
them many fair Promises, in Case of their Compliance; but threatened
them with utter Destruction, in Case of their refusing the Terms he had
offered. Many of the _French Indian_ Allies were present, when the
Governor of _Canada_ refused any Agreement without his Allies being
included in it, and this attached them exceedingly to the _French_
Interest. This Regard, which the _French_ generally shew for the
Interest of their Allies, is a Piece of Policy which, upon all
Occasions, proves useful to them; whereas, the Neglect of this Piece of
natural Justice has as often been prejudicial to others, who have not
had so tender a Sense of it. But it is not so easy for a weak State to
keep up its Honour in such Cases, as it is for a powerful Prince.

[Footnote 38: When the Affair of which they speak concerns the
Government of _New-York_, the _Indians_ always address themselves to the
Governor, whether he be present or not.]

[Footnote 39: This, in the _Indian_ Idiom, signifies a trifling Excuse
of an unwilling Person.]

[Footnote 40: The _French_ call it _la Famine_, near Oswego. The Treaty
with Mr. _de la Bar_ was made there.]




  CHAP. XI.

_The War renewed_. _The_ French _repossess themselves of_ Cadarackui
_Fort_, _and find Means to break off the Treaty between the_ Five
Nations _and_ Dionondadies.


The _Five Nations_ refusing to come to the Governor of _Canada_'s Terms,
he resolved to force them; and as he suspected that they continued
obstinate, by the Advice of the _English_, and the Confidence they had
of the _English_ Assistance, he thought he would most effectually lessen
that Confidence, by attacking and destroying the remainder of the
_Mohawks_, who liv'd adjoining to the _English_ Settlements. For this
Purpose he resolved to march, in the Winter, the whole Force of _Canada_
against that Nation; but one of the Prisoners learning their Design,
made his Escape, and informed the _Mohawks_ of it. This made him alter
his Measures, knowing well enough, that if the _English_ were prepared
to receive them, such an Enterprize would only lead those engaged in it
to certain Destruction. He then sent three hundred Men into the Neck of
Land between _Lake Erie_ and _Cadarackui Lake_, the usual hunting Place
of the _Five Nations_, in hopes of surprising them while they hunted
carelessly there, and at the same Time to view the old _French_ Fort
there, to observe in what Condition it remained.

This Party met with three or four Men, who defended themselves
obstinately, till they all fell dead on the Spot. They surprised
likewise a Cabin, where they took some Men and Women Prisoners; and four
of them were publickly burnt alive at _Montreal_. So far the Count _de
Frontenac_ thought it more proper to imitate the _Indians_ in their most
savage Cruelties, than to instruct them, by his Example, in the
Compassion of the Christian Doctrine. A Party of one hundred and fifty
of the _Five Nations_ fell upon the _Dewagunhas_, in their Way to
_Canada_, and entirely routed them. Ten Prisoners were taken, nine of
which were burnt alive, in revenge of the same Fate the four Men of the
_Five Nations_ had received at _Montreal_.

This Year also some sculking _French Indians_ murdered some People near
_Albany_ and _Schenectady_.

The Party sent to view _Cadarackui Fort_ found it in a better Condition
than they expected, the _Indians_ having neglected to demolish and level
the Bastions, and probably they had not Instruments sufficient to do it.
The Count _de Frontenac_ therefore, in the Summer of the Year 1695, sent
a considerable Body of Men, both _French_ and _Indians_, thither, to
repair the Fortifications, and to cover those that should be at work.
The _Five Nations_, in _August_, sent Messengers to _Albany_, to
acquaint the _English_ that the _French_ had taken Possession of
_Cadarackui_, and were repairing of it. They demanded, in Consequence of
the Promise Colonel _Fletcher_ had given them, the Assistance of five
hundred Men and some Cannon, which they promised they would draw over
Land, where they could not be carried by Water. At the same Time they
desired, that the People of _New-England_ might be told, that many of
the _Owenagungas_ were gone with the _French_ to _Cadarackui_, and that
this was a proper Time to fall upon those that remained, and to destroy
them, and the Women and Children.

Coll. _Fletcher_ came to _Albany_ in _September_; there, in a Speech to
the _Five Nations_, he blamed them for being asleep, when they suffered
the _French_ to take Possession of _Cadarackui_; it would have been much
easier, he said, to have prevented their getting the Possession, than to
drive them out, now they are in it, especially as now you yourselves are
convinced, that it is impossible to carry Cannon thither from this
Place. All, says he, I can now do, is to advise you to invest the Place
with your Parties, so as to prevent their receiving any Supply of
Provisions: By this Means you may force them to desert it. Then he gave
them 1000 Pound of Powder, two Thousand Pound of Lead, 57 Fusees, one
Hundred Hatchets, three Hundred and forty eight Knives, and two
Thousand Flints, besides Cloathing, &c. But in my Opinion, the
Government of _New-York_ have, on all Occasions, been exceedingly to be
blamed, in not having some Men of Experience among the _Five Nations_ to
advise and direct them on all Emergencies of Importance. The _French_
are very careful of this, and the _Officers_ of the regular Troops are
obliged to take their Tours among their _Indians_, while the Captains of
the independent Companies of Fusiliers at _New-York_ live like military
Monks, in Idleness and Luxury.

The _French_ gained a great Advantage, by possessing this Place, as it
is of great Security to their Traders, in their passing between
_Montreal_ and _Missilimakinak_. It served likewise as a Place of
Stores, and Retreat in all their Enterprizes against the _Five Nations_,
that Place being nearly about half Way between _Montreal_ and the
Country of the _Five Nations_. It likewise exposed the _Five Nations_ in
their hunting, to the Incursions of that Garison, by its being in the
Neighbourhood of their principal hunting Place for Bever.

The _French_ grew exceedingly uneasy, when they found, that the
_Dionondadies_, who live near _Missilimakinak_, had almost concluded a
Peace with the _Five Nations_, and that the rest of their Allies were
like to follow their Example: Some of these Nations had been at
_Montreal_, and at their Return forwarded the Peace, that thereby they
might be at Liberty to go to _Albany_; for they informed their
Neighbours, that the _Five Nations_ had intirely shut up the Path to
_Montreal_; and besides that, the _French_ were not in a Condition to
supply them, for they had nothing for themselves, not so much as a Drop
of strong Spirits. If these Nations had, at that Time, deserted the
_French_, it might probably have put an End to the _French_ Colony; for
as the Lands of _Canada_ barely produce sufficient for the Subsistence
of its Inhabitants, the only Means they have of purchasing Cloathing and
other Necessaries is by their Trade with the _Indians_. The _French_
likewise had been in Danger of greater Mischief by the Peace, for these
Nations being at War with the _Five Nations_, and lying on the Back of
them, obliged the _Five Nations_ to keep always a very considerable Part
of their Force at home, to defend themselves against these Nations, and
to revenge the Injuries they received from them; but if the Peace had
been concluded with these Nations, the _Five Nations_ could have turned
their whole Force against _Canada_, and probably might have persuaded
these Nations to have joined with them in warring on the _French_.

The _French_ Commandant at _Missilimakinak_ had his Hands full at this
Time; and if he had not been a Man of great Abilities, he must have sunk
under the Difficulties he had to go through; in the first Place, to
contradict the Stories brought from _Montreal_, he ordered the Stores of
his Fort to be sold to the _Indians_ at the cheapest Rate, and assured
them, that great Quantities were every Day expected from _France_, which
were only detained by contrary Winds; and after these Goods shall
arrive, said he, they will be sold cheaper than ever they have been. He
told them likewise, that the Count _de Frontenac_ would never make Peace
with the _Five Nations_, but was resolved to extirpate them; for which
Purpose he was now rebuilding _Cadarackui Fort_. At the same Time he
took all possible Methods to extinguish the Beginnings of Friendship,
which appeared between the _Five Nations_ and _Dionondadies_.

The _Dionondadies_ durst not avow their treating with the _Five Nations_
to the _French_, neither durst the _Five Nations_ trust their Agents in
a Place where they knew the _French_ had so great Influence; both Sides
therefore agreed to carry on their Treaty by Means of Prisoners which
they took from one another. The Civility with which the _Dionondadies_
treated these Prisoners, their dismissing them, and their receiving
again Prisoners which had been taken by the _Five Nations_, gave the
Commandant sufficient Ground to suspect what was doing. The
_Dionondadies_ at last took seven Men of the _Five Nations_ Prisoners,
and carried them to _Missilimakinak_. The _French_ perceiving, by their
Manner of bringing them in, that the _Dionondadies_ intended to treat
them with the Civility they had lately used to others, murdered two of
them with their Knives as they stept ashore. On this the _Dionondadies_
immediately took to their Arms, saved the other Five, and carried them
safe to their Castle; and continuing in Arms, threatened Revenge for the
Insult they had received.

The _French_ were forced in like Manner to stand to their Arms, and as
there are always many different Nations at _Missilimakinak_ trading,
some of which were inveterate Enemies of the _Five Nations_, they joined
with the _French_. The _Utawawas_ stood neuter. This gave the Commandant
Means of ending the Dispute by Composition. He in the first Place
assured them, that the Christians abhorred all Manner of Cruelty, and
then told them, that as the _French_ shared with the _Dionondadies_ in
all the Dangers and Losses sustained by the War, they ought in like
Manner to partake with them in any Advantage. The _Dionondadies_ on this
were persuaded to deliver up one of the Prisoners. What I am about to
relate, I think, gives Room to charge the _French_ with a Piece of
Policy, not only inconsistent with the Christian Religion, but likewise
with the Character of a polite People; and that all Considerations from
Religion, Honour, and Virtue, must give Way to the present Exigencies of
their Affairs. That an End might be put to the Beginnings of a
Reconciliation between these People and the _Five Nations_, the _French_
gave a publick Invitation to feast on the Soup to be made on this
Prisoner, and, in a more particular Manner, invited the _Utawawas_ to
the Entertainment.

The Prisoner being first made fast to a Stake, so as to have Room to
move round it, a _Frenchman_ began the horrid Tragedy, by broiling the
Flesh of the Prisoner's Legs, from his Toes to his Knees, with the red
hot Barrel of a Gun; his Example was followed by an _Utawawa_, and they
relieved one another as they grew tired. The Prisoner all this while
continued his Death Song, till they clapt a red hot Frying-pan on his
Buttocks, when he cried out, Fire is strong and too powerful; then all
their _Indians_ mocked him, as wanting Courage and Resolution. You, they
said, a Soldier and a Captain, as you say, and afraid of Fire; you are
not a Man. They continued their Torments for two Hours without ceasing.
An _Utawawa_ being desirous to outdo the _French_ in their refined
Cruelty, split a Furrow from the Prisoner's Shoulder to his Garter, and
filling it with Gunpowder, set Fire to it. This gave him exquisite Pain,
and raised excessive Laughter in his Tormenters. When they found his
Throat so much parched, that he was no longer able to gratify their Ears
with his howling, they gave him Water, to enable him to continue their
Pleasure longer. But at last his Strength failing, an _Utawawa_ flead
off his Scalp, and threw burning hot Coals on his Scull. Then they
untied him, and bid him run for his Life: He began to run, tumbling like
a drunken Man; they shut up the Way to the East, and made him run
Westward, the Country, as they think, of departed (miserable) Souls. He
had still Force left to throw Stones, till they put an End to his Misery
by knocking him on the Head with a Stone. After this every one cut a
Slice from his Body, to conclude the Tragedy with a Feast. It is doing
no Injury, I think, to these _Frenchmen_, who thus glory in this horrid
Cruelty, to ask them, whether they did not likewise regale their
revengeful Appetites with a Share of this inhuman Feast?

Though I have had frequent Occasions to mention these barbarous inhuman
Cruelties, transacted by the _Indians_, yet I have avoided to relate the
particular Circumstances of them, because I believe few civilized Ears
can bear the reading of them without Horror. But when they are
perpetrated by Christians, and so far gloried in, as to be recorded in
their own History, I am willing to shew it to my Countrymen in its
proper Colours. This last Piece of _French_ History is taken from
_Histoire de l'Amerique Septentrionale, par Monsr. de la Poterie_,
published at _Paris_ with the Royal Licence, and recommended to the
Publick by Mons. _Fontenelle_, Vol. ii. Page 298.

Though this cruel Act had its designed Effect, in breaking off this
Method of negotiating between the _Five Nations_ and _Dionondadies_, it
did not prevent the Peace; and it had very near raised a Civil War with
their own _Indians_, which was only prevented by the dextrous Conduct of
the _French_ Officers, who, in all kind of Artifice, have always been
superior to the _Indians_. But let me observe on this Occasion, that
the avoiding any Misfortune, by any base or wicked Action, is commonly
the Cause of greater Mischiefs than what is thereby avoided; and of this
numerous Examples may be given.




  CHAP. XII.

_The Count_ de Frontenac _attacks_ Onondaga _in Person_, _with the whole
Force of_ Canada. _The_ Five Nations _continue the War with the_ French,
_and make Peace with the_ Dionondadies.


The Count _de Frontenac_ having secured _Cadarackui Fort_, which was
called by his Name, as a Place of Arms and Provisions, and for a Retreat
to the Men that should happen to be sick or wounded, resolved to make
the _Five Nations_ feel his Resentment of their refusing his Terms of
Peace. For this Purpose he assembled all the regular Troops of _Canada_,
the Militia, the _Owenagungas_, the _Quatoghies_ of _Loretto_, the
_Adirondacks_, _Sokokies_, _Nepiciriniens_, the _Praying Indians_ of the
_Five Nations_, and a few _Utawawas_, at _Montreal_, in _June_ 1696. The
other western _Indians_ near _Missilimakinak_, by their late
Correspondence with the _Five Nations_, and the Dissatisfaction they had
manifested, were not trusted. The Manner of making War with the
_Indians_ in a Country wholly covered with Woods, must be so much
different from the Methods used in _Europe_, that I believe the Reader
will be pleased to have a particular Account of the Count _de
Frontenac_'s Conduct in this, who was an old experienced General, in the
seventy fourth Year of his Age.

It is to be observed, that it is impossible to pass the vast Forests
between the Countries of the _Five Nations_ with Waggons, or other
Carriages, or on Horseback, or even on Foot, in the summer Time, by
Reason of many impassible thick Swamps and Morasses. For this Reason,
the only Method of travelling is in Bark Canoes, or very light Battoes,
along the Rivers, which may be easily carried on Men's Shoulders, where
the Stream of the River becomes too rapid, and from one River to
another; for which Purpose the shortest Passes are always chosen, and
are called, for this Reason, Carrying Places.

The Count _de Frontenac_ marched from _la Chine_, in the south End of
the Island of _Montreal_, the fourth of _July_. He divided five hundred
_Indians_ so, that the greatest Number of them should always be in the
Van, which consisted of two Battalions of the regular Troops. They were
followed by the Canoes which carried the Provisions. The Van was
commanded by the Chevalier _de Callieres_, Governor of _Montreal_; he
had with him two large Battoes, which carried two small Pieces of
Cannon, small Mortars, Granadoes, and the Utensils of the Artillery. The
Count _de Frontenac_ was at the Head of the main Body, accompanied by
the Engineer and several Gentlemen Voluntiers. The Body consisted of
four Battalions of the Militia, who, in War with _Indians_, were then
more depended on than the regular Troops; these were commanded by
Monsieur _Ramsay_, Governor of _Trois Rivieres_. The Rear, which
consisted of two Battalions of regular Troops, and of the rest of the
_Indians_, was under the Command of the Chevalier _de Vaudreuil_. All
the _Indians_ had _French_ Officers set over them.

In this Order the Army marched, only those that were in the Van one Day,
were in the Rear the next; and they always kept a Number of _Indians_ on
the Scout, to discover the Tracks of the Enemy, for fear of Ambuscades.
And when they were obliged to carry the Canoes, and drag the large
Battoes, several Parties were detached to cover the Men that worked.

After twelve Days March they arrived at _Cadarackui Fort_, one hundred
eighty Miles from _Montreal_. Here they waited for the _Utawawas_, who
disappointed them; and in the mean Time raised a Bark, which had
remained sunk since _Cadarackui Fort_ was deserted. They crossed over
_Cadarackui_ Lake to _Onondaga_ River (now _Ohswega_). This River being
narrow and rapid, they ordered fifty Men to march on each Side of it, to
prevent their being surprised, and the Army moved slowly along the
River, according to the Intelligence they received from their Scouts.
They found a Tree, as they passed along, on which the _Indians_ had, in
their Manner, painted the _French_ Army, and had laid by it two Bundles
of cut Rushes. This was a Defiance in the _Indian_ Manner, and to tell
them by the Number of Rushes, that fourteen hundred thirty four Men
would meet them. The _French_ passed the little Lake, between _Ohswega_
and _Onondaga_, in Order of Battle; and the two Wings, to prevent their
being surprised, and to make the Place of their Landing more uncertain
to the Enemy, took a Circuit along the Coast. As soon as they had landed
they raised a Fort. A _Seneka_, who had been some time a Prisoner in
_Canada_, and pretended an Attachment to the _French_, was sent out to
make a Discovery. He deserted to the _Onondagas_. He found them waiting
for the _French_, with a Resolution to defend their Castle, and to fight
the _French_; for which Purpose they had sent away their Women and
Children. The _Seneka_ told them that the _French_ Army was as numerous
as the Leaves on the Trees; that they had Machines which threw Balls up
in the Air, and which falling on their Castle burst to Pieces, and
spread Fire and Death every where, against which their Stockadoes could
be of no Defence. This was confirmed by another _Seneka_, who deserted.
Upon which the _Onondagas_ thought it most adviseable to retire, leaving
their poor Fort and bark Cottages all in Flames.

After the General had an Account of this, he marched to their Village in
Order of Battle. The Army was divided into two Lines: The first
commanded by the Chevalier _de Callieres_, who placed himself on the
Left, consisted of two Battalions of the Inhabitants in the Center, and
a Battalion of the regular Troops on each Wing. The Artillery followed
them. Most of the _Indians_ of this Division were upon the Right, who
continually sent out Scouts. The second Line was commanded by the
Chevalier _de Vaudreuel_, composed of the same Number of Battalions, and
in the same Order. The Count _de Frontenac_ was carried in a Chair
directly after the Artillery. But it was impossible for them to keep
their Order, in passing through thick Woods, and in passing Brooks. In
this formidable Manner the aged General marched up to the Ashes of the
Village, and his Army exerted their Fury on the _Indian_ Corn, which
covered a large Field in thick Ranks.

An _Indian Sachem_, about one hundred Years old, would not retire with
the rest, but chose this Time to end his Days. The _French Indians_ had
the Pleasure of tormenting him, which he bore with surprising Evenness
of Mind, and with that Resolution which becomes a _Sachem_ of the _Five
Nations_. He told his Tormentors to remember well his Death, when his
Countrymen should come to take terrible Vengeance of them. Upon which,
one stabbing him several Times with his Knife, he thanked him but said,
you had better make me die by Fire, that these Dogs of _Frenchmen_ may
learn how to suffer like Men. You _Indians_, their Allies, you Dogs of
Dogs, think of me when you shall be in the like State. Thus this old
_Sachem_, under all the Weakness of old Age, preserved a Greatness of
Soul, and a due Regard for the Honour of his Country, to the last Moment
of his Breath.

The Chevalier _de Vaudreuil_ was sent with a Detachment of six or seven
hundred Men to destroy the _Oneydoes_ Corn, who liv'd but a small
Distance from _Onondaga_, which he performed without any Resistance. The
Jesuit _Milet_ had lived for the most Part with the _Oneydoes_; he had
infused into them the most favourable Sentiments of the _French_, and
they had been the most inclined to Peace on the _French_ Terms. Thirty
five of them staid in their Castle to make the _French_ welcome; but the
only Favour they obtained, was to be made Prisoners, and carried to
_Montreal_. The _French_ Governor declared his Resolutions to extirpate
the _Onondagas_, and for that Reason gave Orders to give no Quarter.

The Difficulty of supporting so many Men in these Deserts, made it
necessary for the Count _de Frontenac_ to return as speedily as
possible. Though the _French_ Army was much an Overmatch for the
_Onondagas_, both in Number of Men and in their Arms, the _Onondagas_
were not so far dispirited, as not to follow them in their Return. They
found Opportunities to revenge themselves in some Measure, by cutting
off every Canoe that happened at any Time to be at a Distance from the
main Body. This obliged the Count to hasten his March, so that he
returned to _Montreal_ the tenth of _August_.

The _Onondagas_ suffered nothing by this chargeable Expedition, but the
Loss of their Corn, and their Bark Cottages. They lost not one Man, but
the old _Sachem_, who resolved to die a Martyr to his Country's Honour.
The _French_ suffered considerably by its Consequences; for all the
Planters being taken off from their Labour, either in this Expedition,
or in watching and securing their Forts and Country, a Famine ensued;
and this I find has often happened in _Canada_, where all the Men, fit
to bear Arms, have been employed in such like Expeditions. If the
_Oneydoes_ had not timely surrendered themselves, the Count had not been
able to have carried Home the least Token of a Victory. And all that can
be said for this Enterprize is, that it was a kind of heroick Dotage.

The Influence that the Jesuit _Milet_ had obtained over the _Oneydoes_
was such, that some Time after this, thirty of them deserted to the
_French_, and desired that he might be appointed their Pastor.

In the following Winter the _Mohawks_, with the Governor of _New York_'s
Privacy, =sent one to the _Praying Indians_ with two Belts=, and he
carried two Prisoners with him. By the first Belt he asked, whether the
Path was entirely shut up between their two Countries; and, by the
second, demanded the Restitution of a Prisoner the _Praying Indians_ had
taken: But his real Design was, to learn the State of their Country, and
what Designs were forming. Notwithstanding the Influence and Artifice of
the _French_ Priests over these Converts, they still retained an
Affection to their Countrymen; for which Reason the Count _de Frontenac_
entertained a Jealousy of these Intercourses, and threatened to put to
Death any that should come in that Manner again; but the Messenger had
the Satisfaction of discovering the distressed Condition of _Canada_ by
Famine.

A Party of the _French_ was sent out in the Winter, to make some Attempt
upon the _English_ Settlements near _Albany_; but some _Mohawks_ and
_Scahkook Indians_ meeting with them, before they reached the
Settlements, they were intirely routed. The commanding Officer, one _du
Bau_, and two others, saved themselves from the Fury of the _Indians_,
by running to _Albany_; the rest were either killed or perished in the
Woods, so that not one Man of this Party got back to _Canada_.

It was much easier for the _French_ to set the _Praying Indians_ upon
the _English_, against whom it is possible many of them had personal
Animosities, that made them go over to the _French_, than to fight their
Countrymen. Several of them came this Winter skulking about
_Schenectady_ and _Albany_; and being well acquainted with the Country,
and speaking likewise the _Mohawk_'s Language, by which they sometimes
deceived the Inhabitants, they surprised some of the Inhabitants, and
carried away their Scalps.

The _Five Nations_, to shew that the Count _de Frontenac_'s Expedition
had no Way discouraged them, sent out several Parties against _Canada_.
One of them met with a Party of _French_ upon _St. Laurence River_, near
_Montreal_. The _French_ were routed, and their Captain killed. As soon
as this was heard at _Montreal_, _Repentigni_ was sent out after them
with a considerable Party of _French_, _Nepicirinien Indians_ and
_Praying Indians_; but this Party was likewise defeated, and the
Captain, with many of his Men, killed.

Thus the War was continued till the Peace of _Reswick_, by small Parties
of _Indians_, on both Sides, harassing, surprising, and scalping the
Inhabitants near _Montreal_ and _Albany_.

Some Time this Year the chief _Sachem_ of the _Dionondadies_ (whom the
_French_ call the _Baron_) went to _Quebeck_, pretending a strong
Attachment to the _French_, but really to conceal the Treaty of Peace
that he was on the Point of concluding with the _Five Nations_; for
which Purpose he had =sent his Son with nineteen Belts= to the _Senekas_.
The Substance of whose Commission was as follows:

The _French_ have for many Years confounded our Resolutions, and
deceived us, but now we are resolved to break all their Artifices, by
stopping our Ears. We come now to unite with you, while the _French_
know nothing of the Matter. The Commandant at _Missilimakinak_ has told
us many Lies, he has betrayed us, and made us kill one another, but we
are firmly resolved never to hearken to him any more. The Peace was
accordingly firmly concluded, notwithstanding all the Opposition the
_French_ could make. The _French_ Authors say, the only Reason that
induced the _Dionondadies_ was, that the _English_ sold them Goods
cheaper than the _French_ could.

Some Time before the News of the Peace arrived, the _French_ at
_Montreal_ being informed that a Party of the _Five Nations_ were
discovered near _Corlear's Lake_, sent out a Captain with a Party of
Soldiers and _Indians_, who being well experienced in the Manner of
making War with _Indians_, marched through the thickest Woods, and by
the least frequented Places, so that he discovered the Enemy, without
being discovered. He surprised that Party, killed several, and took one
Prisoner. The _Utawawas_ being then trading at _Montreal_, the Count
_de Frontenac_ invited them to a Feast to be made of this Prisoner, and
caused him to be burnt publickly alive at _Montreal_, in the Manner of
which I have already given two Accounts from the _French_ Authors.




  CHAP. XIII.

_The Conduct which the_ English _and_ French _observed_, _in regard to
the_ Five Nations, _immediately after the Peace of_ Reswick.


Soon after the News of the Peace of _Reswick_ reached _New-York_, the
Governor sent an Express to _Canada_, to inform the Governor there of
it, that Hostilities might cease. The _Five Nations_ having an Account
of the Peace earlier than they had it in _Canada_, took Advantage of it,
in hunting Bever near _Cadarackui Fort_. The Governor of _Canada_ being
informed of this, and believing that the _Five Nations_ thought
themselves secure by the general Peace, resolved to take his last
Revenge of them. For this Purpose he sent a considerable Party of
_Adirondacks_ to surprise them, which they did, and killed several, but
not without Loss of many of their own Men. The Loss of one of their
greatest Captains at that Time gave the _Five Nations_ the greatest
Affliction. After he was mortally wounded, he cried out: "Must I, who
have made the whole Earth tremble before me, now die by the Hands of
Children?" for he despised the _Adirondacks_.

A Dispute at this Time arose, between the Government of _New-York_ and
_Canada_, about the _French_ Prisoners which the _Five Nations_ had in
their Hands. The Earl of _Bellamont_, then Governor of _New-York_, would
have the _French_ receive those Prisoners from him, and directed the
_Five Nations_ to bring them to _Albany_ for that Purpose. The _French_,
on the other Hand, refused to own the _Five Nations_ as subject to the
Crown of _Great-Britain_, and threatened to continue the War against the
_Five Nations_, if they did not bring the Prisoners to _Montreal_, and
deliver them there. The Count _de Frontenac_ sent some of the _Praying
Indians_ with a Message to this Purpose, and to have all the _French_
Allies included in the general Peace.

The Messenger on his Return told the Count, publickly in Presence of
several _Utawawas_, that the _Five Nations_ refused to include several
of his Allies, but were resolved to revenge the Injuries they had
received. The _Utawawas_ were exceedingly discomposed at hearing this,
and the Count, to recover their Spirits, assured them, that he never
would make Peace without including all his Allies in it, and without
having all their Prisoners restored. At the same Time he made
Preparations to attack the _Five Nations_ with the whole Force of
_Canada_.

The Earl of _Bellamont_ being informed of this, sent Captain _John
Schuyler_ (of the Militia) to tell the Count, that he had the Interest
of the King his Master too much at Heart, to suffer the _French_ to
treat the _Five Nations_ like Enemies, after the Conclusion of the
general Peace; for which Reason he had ordered them to be on their
Guard, and had furnished them with Arms and Ammunition; that he had
ordered the Lieutenant-Governor, in Case they were attacked, either by
the _French_ or their Allies, to join them with the regular Troops; and
that, if he found it necessary, he would raise the whole Force of his
Government in their Defence.

This put a Stop to the _French_ Threatening, and both Sides made
Complaint to their Masters. The two Kings ordered their respective
Governors to be assisting to each other, in making the Peace effectual
to both Nations, and to leave the Disputes, as to the Dependency of the
_Indian Nations_, to be determined by Commissioners, to be appointed
pursuant to the Treaty of _Reswick_.

It is exceedingly impolitick, when weaker Potentates, ingaged in a
Confederacy against one powerful Prince, leave any Points to be
determined after the Conclusion of a Peace; for if they cannot obtain a
Concession, while the Confederacy stands and their Force is united, how
can a weaker Prince hope to obtain it, when he is left alone to himself,
after the Confederacy is dissolved? The _French_ have so often found the
Benefit of this Piece of Imprudence, that in all their Treaties they use
all the Cajoling, and every Artifice in their Power, to obtain this
Advantage, and they seldom miss it.

About the Time of the Conclusion of the Peace at _Reswick_, the noted
_Therouet_ died at _Montreal_. The _French_ gave him Christian Burial in
a pompous Manner, the Priest, that attended him at his Death, having
declared that he died a true Christian; for, said the Priest, while I
explained to him the Passion of our Saviour, whom the _Jews_ crucified,
he cried out; "Oh! had I been there, I would have revenged his Death,
and brought away their Scalps."

Soon after the Peace was known at _Montreal_, three considerable Men of
the _Praying Indians_ came to _Albany_; they had fine laced Coats given
them, and were invited to return to their own Country. They answered,
that they were young Men, and had not Skill to make a suitable Answer,
and had not their ancient Men to consult with; but promised to
communicate the Proposals to their old Men, and would bring back an
Answer in the Fall. I find nothing more of this in the Register of
_Indian Affairs_, though it might have been of great Consequence had it
been pursued to Purpose; but such Matters, where there is not an
immediate private Profit, are seldom pursued by the _English_ with that
Care and Assiduity, with which they are by the _French_.

While Captain _Schuyler_ was in _Canada_, he entered into some
indiscreet Discourse with Monsieur _Maricour_, for whom the _Five
Nations_ had a particular Esteem, and call _Stowtowisse_. Captain
_Schuyler_, in asserting the Dependency of the _Five Nations_ on
_New-York_, said, that those Nations were their Slaves. Mr. _Maricour_
told this Discourse to an _Onondaga_, with all the Aggravations he
could, and added, that it was intirely owing to the _English_ that the
Peace was not absolutely concluded, and that Captain _Schuyler_
prevented their Prisoners being restored, because he would have them
sent to _Albany_, as being Slaves to the _English_. That the _French_
had no Dispute with the _English_, but for the Independency of the _Five
Nations_. This indiscreet Conduct of Captain _Schuyler_ was so much
resented by the _Five Nations_, that a Deputation of the most
considerable _Sachems_ was sent to _Albany_ in _June_ 1699, to complain
of it; and they sent at the same Time Deputies to _Canada_ to conclude
the Peace, independently of the _English_. These Deputies that came to
_Albany_ were so far convinced that the _French_ had abused them, and
how much more it was for their Security to be included in the general
Peace with the _English_, than to have only the _French_ Faith for their
Security, that they immediately dispatched a Messenger after their
Deputies that were gone to _Canada_. Though this Messenger reached them
too late to stop their Proceeding, it convinced the Deputies so far of
its being for their Interest to be joined with the _English_ in the
Peace, as they had been in the War, that they insisted that the
Exchange of Prisoners be made at _Albany_. At the same Time the
Messenger was sent after their Deputies to _Canada_, Colonel _Peter
Schuyler_ was sent with others to _Onondaga_, to remove the Prejudices
they had received there.

The Count _de Frontenac_ died while these Disputes continued. Monsieur
_de Callieres_, who succeeded him, put an End to them, by agreeing to
send to _Onondaga_ to regulate the Exchange of Prisoners there; for
which Purpose Monsieur _Maricour_, _Ioncaire_, and the Jesuit _Bruyas_,
were sent.

When the _French_ Commissioners were come within less than a Mile of
_Onondaga_ Castle, they put themselves in Order and marched with the
_French_ Colours carried before them, and with as much Show as they
could make. _Decanesora_ met them without the Gate, and =complimented
them with three Strings of Wampum=. By the first he wiped away their
Tears for the _French_ that had been slain in the War. By the second he
opened their Mouths, that they might speak freely; that is, promised
them Freedom of Speech. By the third he cleaned the Matt, on which they
were to sit, from the Blood that had been spilt on both Sides: The
Compliment was returned by the Jesuit, then they entered the Fort, and
were saluted with a general Discharge of all the fire Arms. They were
carried to the best Cabin in the Fort, and there entertained with a
Feast. The Deputies of the several Nations not being all arrived, the
Jesuit, and Monsieur _Maricour_, passed the Time in visiting and
conversing with the _French_ Prisoners. The General Council being at
last met, the Jesuit made the following Speech, which I take from the
Relation the _Five Nations_ afterwards made of it to the Earl of
_Bellamont_.

    "1. I am glad to see the _Five Nations_, and that some of them
    went to _Canada_, notwithstanding _Corlear_ forbid them: I am
    sorry for the Loss of your People killed by the remote
    _Indians_; I condole their Death, and wipe away the Blood by
    this Belt.

    "2. The War Kettle boiled so long, that it would have scalded
    all the _Five Nations_ had it continued; but now it is overset,
    and turned upside down, and a firm Peace made.

    "3. I now plant the Tree of Peace and Welfare at _Onondaga_.

    "4. Keep fast the Chain you have made with _Corlear_, for now we
    have one Heart and one Interest with them; but why is _Corlear_
    against your corresponding with us, ought we not to converse
    together when we are at Peace and in Friendship?

    "5. Deliver up the _French_ Prisoners you have, and we shall
    deliver not only those of your Nation we have, but all those
    likewise taken by any of our Allies; and gave a Belt.

    "6. I offer myself to you to live with you at _Onondaga_, to
    instruct you in the Christian Religion, and to drive away all
    Sickness, Plagues and Diseases out of your Country, and gave a
    third Belt.

    "7. This last Belt, he said, is from the _Rondaxe_, or _French
    Indians_, to desire Restitution of the Prisoners taken from
    them."

    The Jesuit in the Conclusion said; "Why does not _Corlear_ tell
    you what passes between the Governor of _Canada_ and him? He
    keeps you in the Dark, while the Governor of _Canada_ conceals
    nothing from his Children. Nor does the Governor of _Canada_
    claim your Land, as _Corlear_ does."

The General Council immediately rejected the Belt by which the Jesuit
offered to stay with them, saying, We have already accepted _Corlear's_
Belt, by which he offers us Pastors to instruct us. _Decanesora_ added,
The Jesuits have always deceived us, for while they preached Peace, the
_French_ came and knocked us on the Head. To this the Jesuit replied,
that if he had known that _Corlear_ intended to send them Pastors, he
would not have offered this Belt.

It is to be observed that the _Indian_ Council refused to hear the
_French_, or to give them an Answer, but in Presence of the
Commissioners from _Albany_.

The _French_ Commissioners having assured the Peace with the _Five
Nations_, the Inhabitants of _Canada_ esteemed it the greatest Blessing
that could be procured for them from Heaven; for nothing could be more
terrible than this last War with the _Five Nations_. While this War
lasted, the Inhabitants eat their Bread in continual Fear and Trembling.
No Man was sure, when out of his House, of ever returning to it again.
While they laboured in the Fields, they were under perpetual
Apprehensions of being killed or seized, and carried to the _Indian_
Country, there to end their Days in cruel Torments. They many Times were
forced to neglect both their Seed Time and Harvest. The Landlord often
saw all his Land plundered, his Houses burnt, and the whole Country
ruined, while they thought their Persons not safe in their
Fortifications. In short, all Trade and Business was often at an intire
Stand, while Fear, Despair, and Misery appeared in the Faces of the poor
Inhabitants.

The _French_ Commissioners carried several of the principal _Sachems_ of
the _Five Nations_ back with them, who were received at _Montreal_ with
great Joy. They were saluted by a Discharge of all the great Guns round
the Place, as they entered. The _French_ Allies took this amiss, and
asked if their Governor was entering. They were told, that it was a
Compliment paid to the _Five Nations_, whose _Sachems_ were then
entering the Town. We perceive, they replied, that Fear makes the
_French_ shew more Respect to their Enemies, than Love can make them do
to their Friends.

Monsieur _de Callieres_ assembled all the _French_ Allies, (who were
then very numerous at _Montreal_) to make the Exchange of Prisoners, and
they delivered the Prisoners they had taken, though the _Five Nations_
had sent none to be exchanged for them. Thus we see a brave People
struggle with every Difficulty, till they can get out of it with Honour;
and such People always gain Respect, even from their most inveterate
Enemies.

I shall finish this Part by observing, that notwithstanding the _French_
Commissioners took all the Pains possible to carry Home the _French_,
that were Prisoners with the _Five Nations_, and they had full Liberty
from the _Indians_, few of them could be persuaded to return. It may be
thought that this was occasioned from the Hardships they had endured in
their own Country, under a tyrannical Government and a barren Soil: But
this certainly was not the only Reason; for the _English_ had as much
Difficulty to persuade the People, that had been taken Prisoners by the
_French Indians_, to leave the _Indian_ Manner of living, though no
People enjoy more Liberty, and live in greater Plenty, than the common
Inhabitants of _New-York_ do. No Arguments, no Intreaties, nor Tears of
their Friends and Relations, could persuade many of them to leave their
new _Indian_ Friends and Acquaintance; several of them that were by the
Caressings of their Relations persuaded to come Home, in a little Time
grew tired of our Manner of living, and run away again to the _Indians_,
and ended their Days with them. On the other Hand, _Indian_ Children
have been carefully educated among the _English_, cloathed and taught,
yet, I think, there is not one Instance, that any of these, after they
had Liberty to go among their own People, and were come to Age, would
remain with the _English_, but returned to their own Nations, and became
as fond of the _Indian_ Manner of Life as those that knew nothing of a
civilized Manner of living. What I now tell of Christian Prisoners among
_Indians_, relates not only to what happened at the Conclusion of this
War, but has been found true on many other Occasions.


  _The End of the_ Second Part.


[Illustration]


  =Transcriber's Notes:=
  hyphenation, spelling and grammar have been preserved as in the original
  Page ii, extra word to removed
  Page 3, who remembred the ==> who remembered the
  Page 12, I immmediately told ==> I immediately told
  Page 18, to exereise Cruelty ==> to exercise Cruelty
  Page 31, that the Chigtaghcicks ==> that the Chictaghicks
  Page 35, and Mahikindars or ==> and Mahikandars or
  Page 51, desire may may be ==> desire may be
  Page 52, the Peace. Gives ==> the Peace." Gives
  Page 65, on the other. ==> on the other.)
  Page 67, be extreamly grieved ==> be extremely grieved
  Page 67, confirms my Words. ==> confirms my Words.
  Page 71, Way towards Monreal ==> Way towards Montreal
  Page 72, the Begining of ==> the Beginning of
  Page 75, the Mihikander Indians ==> the Mahikander Indians
  Page 83, which he gave to to an _Indian_ ==> which he gave to an _Indian_
  Page 84, Troies Rivieres ==> Trois Rivieres
  Page 84, to the War. ==> to the War.
  Page 87, intercepting them. ==> intercepting them.
  Page 107, Belt of Wampum ==> Belt of Wampum.
  Page 107 footnote, Ersel signifies ==> Ertel signifies
  Page 111, Therhansera, Oghuesse and ==> Therhansera, Ohguesse and
  Page 111, Our Far-fighters shall ==> Our Fair-fighters shall
  Page 140, we are but ==> We are but
  Page 141, the Brethrens Backwardness ==> the Brethren's Backwardness
  Page 143, de Magdaleine the ==> de Magdeleine the
  Page 152, three Bever Skins. ==> three Bever Skins.
  Page 155, delivered to them. ==> delivered to them.
  Page 172, those of Cahnaaga ==> those of Cahnuaga
  Page 172 footnote, near Ohswego. ==> near Oswego.
  Page 179, most favorable to ==> most favourable to
  Page 181, an Enterprise would ==> an Enterprize would
  Page 182, and some Canon ==> and some Cannon
  Page 183, their Enterprises against ==> their Enterprizes against






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the Five Indian Nations
of Canada, by Cadwallader Colden

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE INDIAN NATIONS OF CANADA ***

***** This file should be named 35719-8.txt or 35719-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/1/35719/

Produced by Iona Vaughan, Ross Cooling, mcbax and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
