The Project Gutenberg EBook of Journal of Dr. Elias Cornelius, a
Revolutionary Surgeon, by Elias Cornelius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Journal of Dr. Elias Cornelius, a Revolutionary Surgeon

Author: Elias Cornelius

Release Date: August 11, 2011 [EBook #37035]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS ***




Produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  JOURNAL OF
  DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS,
  A REVOLUTIONARY SURGEON.


  GRAPHIC DESCRIPTION
  OF HIS SUFFERINGS
  WHILE A
  PRISONER IN PROVOST JAIL,
  NEW YORK, 1777 AND 1778,
  WITH BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


  PUBLISHED BY
  JUDGE CHARLES M. TOMPKINS
  AND
  CHESTER T. SHERMAN,
  WASHINGTON, D. C.
  1903.

  PRICE, FIFTY CENTS, POSTPAID.




  JOURNAL OF
  DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS,
  A REVOLUTIONARY SURGEON,
  AND
  BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.




  Copyright, 1902,
  By Chester T. Sherman.




JOURNAL OF ELIAS CORNELIUS, M. D.,

_Surgeon's Mate in the American Revolutionary Army_,

While a Prisoner to the British in the Provost Jail, New York, 1777 and
1778.


AUGT. 22, 1777.--This morning I marched down to East Chester with the main
body of our troops in that division Viz. Gen Varnum's Brigade of
Continental troops & Gen Ward's of Conneticut Malitia where we went and
surprized one of the Enemies Piquets and took two officers and some
privates with some Tories & Negroes. After that I went with our two guides
and Dr Tunison of the General Hospital, and seized some stores that was
within the Enemies Lines and kept for their use. After that (which was
about two o'clock P. M.) the Gen thought proper to send out Piquet Guards.
Capt Y Alden of Col Samuel B. Webbs Regiment, was detached, with about
fifty men to command the advanced Piquet on the left, near West Chester.
Capt David Dexter of Israel Angell's Regiment was detached with the same
number of men to command the advanced Guards on the right at Miles Square.
I, wishing to be where most was to be done, rode down with Capt Dexter. He
stopped at Miles Square; but seeing a body of men at a distance on the
right towards North River, not knowing who they were I sat out with a
determination to find out. I had gone but half way when I met Col Dammond.

After some conversation we concluded to ride to the Enemies advanced Post,
and see what discoveries we could make. After riding in sight of Fort
Independence, we returned unmolested to Col Dammond's Regiment. While we
were riding we heard cannonading and firing of small arms, which we
supposed to be the enemy attacking our advanced Guards on the left; here I
left Col Dammond and returned to Capt Dexter's Piquet and there tarried
some minutes, after which set out for Head Quarters, where I had left the
Gen and main bodys of the troops at East Chester. It had become late in
the afternoon, but I thought myself safe, as I had been six miles nearer
the enemy than I was at that time. I had now four miles to ride before I
came to Capt Dexter's Piquet. Before I come to East Chester it took up
some time; I however arrived there in an hour and a half. To my great
surprise I found that our troops had left the place and retired back and
the Enemies scouting parties were in the town. (At this time Capt Alden on
the left was killed and his Piquets chiefly killed or taken.) On riding
into town, while passing a corner, four of the Enemy started from behind a
shed, one of whom seized my horse, another seized me by my coat & legs
asked me where I belonged, to which I answered to the Army of the United
States of America and to Gen Varnum's Brigade of Continental troops, and
then I asked where Gen Varnum was: one of them (John Anderson a noted
Tory) said "I am he," I answered, it is false. By this time they had me to
the ground during which time, one of them seized one of my pistols, the
other I took and presented at the breast of the leader and bid him
surrender, he immediately took the one he had taken from me, and
presenting it asked me if I would surrender, to which I answered, No, he
immediately ordered the others to make ready their peices and advance,
then turning to me, he said if I "did not at once surrender he would order
his men to blow a Brace of Pistols through me" I immediately surrendered.
They at once began robbing me of everything I had. Viz Horse & Harness,
Pair of Pistols, Great Coat, pair of Shoe Buckles, pocket book with notes
&c to the amount of 25 or 30£; besides some money, and sundry other
articles. I was then put under guard and proceeded to West Chester; we had
gone but half a mile when we met one of the Seargents of Capt Alden's
party, making his escape from the enemy to our guards. Here the leader of
the guard that had taken me seised him and drove him with me to a place 3
miles below West Chester to a Mr Hunt's an old tavern keeper. This man
abused me more than any other, while I was a prisoner here I with my
companion was kept till the next morning. The officers that our party had
taken of the enemy, (the same morning I was taken) were allowed to walk
the streets and were not put under guard, and had their Parole
immediately. Where, as I and my companion were put in close confinement,
with 13 sentinals, who would not allow us to speak.

AUGUST 23rd--This morning as I and my companion were conveyed to Kings
Bridge we met Mr Delaney a Tory Col, who inquired of our leader "where he
got those scoundrels?" to which he replied that they where some of
Washington's army. We had gone but little farther, when we met a man who
told us that he saw Capt Alden dead, the day before and that he helped to
bury him. When we arrived at Kings Bridge I was put under the Provost
Guard where to, my sorrow, I found a man by the name of Prichard, who was
one of Capt Alden's Piquet and belonged to the State Guards of
Connecticut. He had his Commission with him which was taken and never
returned. Besides myself and the man just mentioned, there were several
others who were under guard with us; one Sargent of the State Guards, a
Corporal of Col Webbs Regiment, one of the Light-Horse, and 8 Privates, in
all 13. We were kept, in this place sometime under the Hesian Guards. I
applied for the things of which I was robbed, my pocket-book & buckles
were returned. I then made application for things, which belonged to other
prisoners, (on their behalf.) Some of them had part of their things
returned, others nothing. At eleven O'clock a Surgeon of the British Army
came to me, and inquired for news papers. I told him I had none, he then
gave me a New York paper, and said that I should have my parole as soon as
I reached New York. The only provision we had as yet received since we
arrived here was some mouldy bread, a pint of rum put into a bucket of
water, once in a while the Hesian that Guarded us would bring some sour
apples in his hat and throw them down among us as he would among so many
pigs. The guards being relieved we were marched for New York. Just before
we reached there we were taken to the Quarters of a Hesian General for a
show. Here the Hesians flocked around us, mocking us, sometimes drawing
their swords across our throats, and saying we were to be hung here. A
mate of the Hesian Surgeon seeing me much fatigued gave me a glass of wine
which refreshed me much. Here our present guards were relieved by other
Hesians; we were marched for Harlem here we were brought before Gen.
Piquet, a Brigideer General in the British Service; we staid here a few
minutes, we were then put under an English Guard, who treated us better
than we had been before; under this guard we went to New York. It being
very warm weather, and the Guards changing often, we were marched so fast,
that some of us were ready to faint. But we were not allowed to stop even
to get a drink of water till we came to within four miles of New York,
when a poor woman seeing our condition, came out and entreated our guards
to stop that she might give us some water; the guard consented and the
good woman (as I may call her, for I beleive she was the means of saving
the life of one of our men who was just sinking with the heat) ran into
the house and brought us several pails of beer and three or four loaves of
bread and two or three pounds of Cheese, and to some of us she gave some
money; the name of this woman was Clemons, a native of Boston, and she
was about 30 years of age. She kept a small shop at the righthand side of
the road near Kings bridge. We marched till we come to the Bowery, within
3/4 of a mile of New York; being very thirsty I prevailed upon the guard
to stop, that we might again refresh ourselves. We asked some negroes if
they would give us some water, to which they replied "No Domd you, you
rebels, that we cant give you none, we are some of Donmons Men," we were
forced to go on without our desired refreshments.

As we come into the town the Hesians, Negroes, and children insulted,
stoned and abused us in every way they could think of. At that time two of
our men had become so fatigued that we were obliged to carry them. In this
way we were led through half the streets, as a show. At last we were
brought before Gen Jones who ordered us to the Sugar House which formerly
went by the name of Livingston's Sugar House which was the Prison the
private Soldiers were kept in. Here one Walley a Seargent of the 20th
Regt. of Irish troops in the British Service, had the charge of the
prisoners. This man was the most barbarous, cruel man that ever I saw he
drove us into the Sugar house yard like so many hogs, from there he
ordered us into the Sugar House which was the dirtiest and most
disagreeable place that I ever saw and the water in the pump was not
better than that in the Dock. The top of the House was open to the
weather, so that when it rained the water ran along and through every
floor and on that account it was impossible for us to keep dry. Mr Walley
gave us (13 of us) 4 pounds of poor Irish Pork and 4 pounds of mouldy
bread for 4 days. After passing one night I asked Mr Walley if I was not
to have my parole to which he answered No. I then asked for a pen and ink
that I might write a petition to the Gen for it, he answered no, and was
very cross and abused me very much. I again asked him the reason why I was
not to have my parole, he told me I was not to have it. I then asked him
if he would let me have a pen and ink to write a few lines to my father
which he might see before I sent them. He then struck me across the face
with a staff which I have seen him beat the prisoners; he told me he would
find a place for me. The next morning he came and took me out of prison
under guard with one Capt Bissel (whom he had taken from the main Guard)
and conveyed us to the Provost Guard. Capt Bissel was put in the upper
part of the prison. I was then taken down to a Dungeon; when the door was
opened "here" says Sergeant Keith (the Provost marshal) "here's a Doctor
for you, you Damb rebbel." When I went in I found Capt Chatham formaly
Capt of a Privateer, and belonged to Pensylvania, and was taken prisoner
and put in this dungeon, because after he was taken captive, he was
ordered to pilot their ship up the Deleware, which he refused. There was
also in this place a Capt Travis, of Virginia, & Capt of a Sloop of War, &
John McCalsenden a Quarter Master in the Continental Army, and belonged to
the first Battallion of New Jersey, and was accused of being a deserter
Six or Seven years before the present war begun. He was condemned to be
hung, but did not know which; he had been there between five and six
months; There were also in this dismal place besides these mentioned, nine
thieves murderers &c. While in this place Capt Chatham was taken sick with
nervous fever, I solicited Seargent Keith to permit him to go up stairs,
But he answered in the negative. I then requested him to suffer me to send
for some Medicine or I believe he must die, to which he replied he might
die; and if he did he would bury him. All the provision each man had for a
week was but, two pounds of Meat and two pounds of bread, always one and
sometimes both was not fit to eat, and those who had money were not able
to send to purchase any of the necessaries of life. At this time I had not
one farthing of money just being robbed of all, and also of my clothing
except what I had on. I had no change of linen from the 25th of August
till the 12th of September. At this time I solicited Sargent Keith to
permit me to send to my father on Long Island and see if he would send me
some money and clothing which I was much in need of. (My father was one of
their beloved friends and lived among them) But he as before positively
answered in the negative, and said that no paper or written message should
be sent out of the dungeon. About this time I was feeling resigned to
suffer all the punishment that they were desirous of inflicting upon me.
Remembering that many of my dear country men had previously suffered
greater punishment than mine; and that many of them died and bled in their
countrys cause, and defence. Previously contemplating and Meditating that
the cause we were contending for, was a just cause, and a cause that all
mankind ought to be interested in. Having meditated on all these things, I
thought myself in duty bound, to suffer with patience & fortitude, with my
fellow prisoners in my country's cause. In this hidious place I was kept
till the twentieth of September following; when Seargent Keith (the
Provost Martial) came to the dungeon and took Capt Chatham, and Travis,
and myself, and led us to the upper part of the prison, where I found my
friends that were also prisoners, Viz, Ethan Allen, Major Williams, Paine
& Wells and others. Allen was made prisoner near Montreal, in the
beginning of the war. He was put on board a man of war, and kept chained
flat on his back in the hole six months. He also told me he had twice been
carried on shore in England to be hung, but was reprieved. He was likewise
taken on shore in Ireland and at Halifax for the same purpose. After this
he was brought to New York, where for a short time he had his parole, it
was taken from him, and he put in the provost jail, as there was an
antipathy against him. I left him in this goal on Jan 7, 1778. Major
Williams, belonged at Maryland and was taken prisoner at Fort Washington.
Major Paine belonged at Connecticut. While I was in this place, we were
not allowed to speak to any friend, not even out of the window, I have
frequently seen women beaten with canes and ramrods who have come to the
Prison windows to speak to their Husbands, Sons or Brothers, and officers
taken and put in the dungeon just for asking for cold water. Our provision
was the same as in the dungeon with the exception of dried Peas, we
however had no fire to cook them. Soon Fort Montgomery was taken by Gen
Clinton (British) and all the officers were brought and put in two small
rooms on the lower floor of the prison. Several of them were badly wounded
but no Surgeon was allowed to dress them. I asked Sargent Keith for the
privilege, he first told me I should, but on asking him the second time, I
was refused, and assured if I said any more about it he would put me with
them and there keep me. All of us in the upper prison were sometimes
allowed to go on top of the house, I took this opportunity of throwing
some ointment and Lint down the chimney to the wounded in the lower rooms,
with directions how to use it, I knew only one of them Lt. Col Livingston.
About this time there was a report about town that Burgoyne and his army
were made prisoners, by the army under command of the Hon Major Gen Gates;
it was however soon contradicted in their newspapers, it was set forth in
the following manner "Last Thursday the rebels came to Elizabeth-town
Point, to enlist recruits for the rebel service, and in order to deceive
raised a false report, fired cannon, made fires, and gave away rum without
measure, and said that Gen Burgoyne and his whole army were taken
prisoners. But notwithstanding all their efforts they could not get a
single man. And the account of Gen Burgoyne being taken prisoner is to
rediculous to be beleived." This passed in some of the papers and there
was nothing said for ten or fourteen days, but the women that passed by
made motions assuring us that we might depend upon it that he was surely
taken prisoner. About this time Col Livingston had a letter sent into him
from his father By a British Officer who was coming into New York on
Parole, and was brought to the Commander of the city, who being in haste
ordered his Secretary to write his permission to the letter and direct it
to Mr Livingston a Rebel Col, in the Provost jail, therefore it was
brought to him. Soon we heard hollooing, and other expressions of joy by
him and others in the same room, but could not tell what was the matter.
After he had read the letter over and over again he put it up to us
through the crack in the floor, and we at once knew the cause of their
joy, and the whole prison was filled with joy inexpressible! The truth of
what we heard was at this time confirmed. The next thing we saw was (in
the papers) Gen Burgoyne's capitulation with Gen Gates. From this time
till I left the prison we were better treated, although the provision was
bad. But drew rather larger quantities of it. Some Butter, and about a
gill of rice a week, and some cole which we never drew before. About this
time my father came from Long Island to the prison to see me. I was called
down to the grates. My heart at first was troubled within me, I burst into
tears and did not speak for some minutes. I put my hand through the grates
and took my fathers, and held it fast. The poor old gentleman shed many
tears and seemed quite troubled to see me in so woeful a place. He asked
me how I did I told him poorly but as well as could be expected in such a
hidious place, I then asked after the health of Mother Brother & Sisters,
he told me they were well. I was filled with joy at hearing this as it was
the first time I had heard from them since I entered the service. He asked
me "what I thought of myself now and why I could not have been ruled by
him, he said he had forewarned me of the cost, and that I had been led
away by a bad man (Dr Latham) and that Washington's whole crew would soon
be in the same situation" and says he, "did not you never see his
excellency's proclamation, whare in was set forth a free grace and pardon
to all who would come in voluntarely" (Meaning Sir Wm Hows Proclamation) I
told him I had seen it, says he "why then did you not come in then,
voluntarely, and quit the rebels. I thought you would come in voluntarely
without being brought in by force of arms" Says I, Father what made you
think so, did not I tell you my mind before I left your house, and did not
you know my disposition? Have not I been faithful in all the duties of a
child, to a parent? But, Father you, and every other man must know that it
was a very trying thing to me, to leave all my dear friends and turn
myself out into the world naked, Does this seem to you, to show a
rebellious disposition of temper and mind? When at that time I had not a
relative or acquaintance in the Army, not a relative in the world but what
were enemies to this once happy country. Believe me dear Father, I was not
led away by any man as you supposed. But on the contrary I weighed the
matter seriously before I came into the service, the more I meditated the
more I was led to believe that the cause in which my countrymen were
engaged was a just one, and loudly called for the assistance of every well
wisher of his bleeding country. Such were the feelings when I left my
tender father's family. Soon the provost Martial came and said he could
not allow my father to stay longer, I therefore bade him farewell. Towards
the latter part of December we had Continental bread and beef sent us and
as much wood as we wished to burn, (a friend gave me some money which was
very useful.)

JANUARY 9th 1778.--This day Mr Walley come and took from the prison myself
and six others under guard and took us to the Sugar House where I was
first imprisoned. At this time my health was bad, being troubled with the
Scurvey, and my prospects for the winter were dark. This prison was much
worse than when I left it before, from the fact that there were nearly
thirty soldiers, who went around to the other prisoners and stole from
them, the few comforts they had, and take the sick from their beds and
take their bed clothing, and beat and kick them almost to death. The
articles which they took from us they would carry to Mr Walley and sell
them for rum.

JANUARY 13th.--This morning I being unwell went to the hospital, which was
the brick Meeting House, here I staid until the 16th here I was not much
better than I was in the Sugar House no medicine was given me, though I
had a cough and fever, the Surgeon wished me as soon as I became better to
take the care of the sick, provided he could get my parole.

JANUARY 16th.--On coming the next morning he said he could get it. I was
now determined to make my escape, although hardly able to undertake it.
Just at the dusk of the evening, before the lamps were lighted (having
made the Sentinal intoxicated) I with others went out into the back yard
to endeavor to make our escape over the fence, the others being backward
about going first, I climed upon a tomb stone and gave a spring and went
over safely, and then gave orders for the others to do likewise. A little
Irish lad undertook to leap over, and caught his clothes in the spikes in
the wall, and made something of a noise. The sentinal being aroused
called out (Rouse) which is the same as to command the Guards to turn out.
They were soon out and surrounded the prison, in the meantime I had made
my way to St. Paul's Church, which was the wrong way to get out of town.
The guards expecting, I had gone towards North River, went in that
direction. On arriving at the Church I turned into the street to go by the
College and thus go out of town by the side of the river. Soon after I was
out of town I heard the 8 o'clock gun; which was found on board the
Commodors ship, and was a signal for the Sentinals to hail every man that
came by. I wished much to cross the river but could not find any boat
suitable. While going up the side of the river at 9 O'clock (P M) I was
challenged by a Sentinal with the usual word (Burdon) upon which I
answered nothing, on being challenged the second time I answered Friend.
He bade me advance and give the counter sign, upon which I fancied I was
drunk and advancing in a staggering manner, and after falling to the
ground, he asked me where I was going, home I told him, but had got lost,
and having been to New York, had taken rather too much liquor, and become
somewhat intoxicated. He then asked my name which I told him was Marther
Hopper (Mr Hopper lived not far distant) And solicited him to put me in
the right road, but told me that I must not go till the Sargent of the
Guards dismissed me from him, unless I could give him the counter sign. I
still entreated him to let me go knowing the situation I was in. Soon,
however, he consented and directed my course which I thanked him for. Soon
the moon arose and made it very light, and there being snow on the ground,
crusted over, and no wind, therefore a person walking, could be heard a
great distance. At this time the tumor in my lungs broke, and being afraid
to cough for fear of being heard, prevented me from releiving myself of
the puss that was lodged there. I had now to cross lots that were cleared
and covered with snow, the houses being thick on the road, which I was to
cross, and for fear of being heard, I lay myself flat on my stomach and
crept along on the frozen snow. When I come to the fence, I climed over,
and walked down the road, near a house where there were music and dancing.
At this time one of the guards came out. I immediately fell down upon my
face. Soon the man went into the house, I rose again and crossed the fence
into the field and proceeded toward the river, there being no trees or
rocks in the field to hinder my being seen, and not being able to walk
without being heard as the snow crust was hard enough to permit my
walking on it, and the dogs beginning to bark, I lay myself flat again and
crept across the field, which took me half an hour. I at length reached
the river and walked by the side of it some distance and saw a small creek
which ran up into the island and by the side of it a small house, and two
Sentinals one each side of it, not knowing what to do I crept into a hole
in the bank which led in between two rocks, here I heard them talk. I
concluded to endeavor to go around the head of the creek which was about
half a mile, but on getting out of the hole I took hold of a limb of a
tree which gave way, and made a great noise, the sentinal on hearing it
said "did you not hear a person on the cr," I waited some minutes and then
went around the head of the creek and came down to the river on the other
side of the house to see if I could not find a boat, to cross to Long
Island. But on finding sentinals near by I returned back a short distance,
and went up the river. I had not gone more than 30 rods, when I saw
another sentinal posted on the bank of the river where I must pass or go
round a half a mile and then come down to the river again. I stood some
minutes thinking what course to pursue, but on looking at the man found he
did not move and was leaning on his gun, I advanced toward him and
succeeding in passing by without waking him up. After this I found a
Sentinal every 15 or 20 rods till I came within 2 miles of Hell Gate. Here
I stayed till my feet began to freese, and having nothing to eat, I went a
mile farther up the river. It now being late I crept up into the bushes
and lay down to think what to do next. I concluded as I could not get a
boat to cross the river to Long Island to remain where I was during the
night and early in the morning to go down to New York and endeavor to find
some house to conceal myself in. In the morning as soon as the Revelry
Beating commenced I went on my way to New York which was 8 miles from this
place, after proceeding awhile I heard the morning guns fired at New York
though 4 miles from it. I passed the sentinals unmolested, down the middle
road, and arrived there before many were up. I met many of the British and
Hessian Soldiers whom I knew very well, but they did not know me. I went
to a house and found them friends of America, and was kindly received of
them, and promised to keep me a few days. I had not been here, but 3/4 of
an hour when I was obliged to call for a bed. After being in bed two or
three hours, I was taken with a stoppage in my breast, and made my
resperation difficult, and still being afraid to cough loud for fear of
being heard. The good lady of the house gave me some medicine of my own
prescribing, which soon gave me relief. Soon a rumor spread about town
among the friends of America, of my confinement and expectation soon to be
retaken, they took measures to have me conveyed to Long Island, which was
accordingly done.

FEB. 18, 1778.--The same day I was landed I walked nine miles, and put up
at a friends house during my walk I passed my Grandfather's house, and
dare not go in to see him for fear he would deliver me up to the British.
The next morning I started on my journey again and reached the place I
intended at 12 O'clock (noon) and put up with two friends. The next
morning I and my companions (two of them) started from our friends with
four days provisions and Shovels and axes to build us a hut in the woods.
We each of us had a musket powder and balls. After going two miles in the
woods, we dug away the snow and made us a fire. After warming ourselves we
set to work to build us a hut and got one side of it done the first day,
and the next day we finished it. It was tolerably comfortable, we kept
large fires and cooked our meat on the coals. In eight or ten days we had
some provisions brought us by our friends. At this time we heard that Capt
Rodgers was cast away on Long Island, and concealed by some of his
friends. We went to see him, and found him, we attempted to stay in the
house in a back room. At about 10 O'clock A. M. there came in a tory, he
knowing some of us seemed much troubled. We made him promise that he would
not make known our escape. The next day my two comrades went back to their
old quarters and Capt Rodgers and myself, and a friend went into the woods
and built us a hut, about ten miles from my former companions, with whom
we kept up a constant corespondence. Soon a man was brought to us by our
friends whom we found to be John Rolston, a man that was confined with us
in the Provost Jail. And was carried to the Hospital about 3 weeks after I
was, and made his escape the same way, and by friends was brought to Long
Island.

MARCH 19th 1778.--About five O'clock a friend came to us and said we had
an opportunity to go over to New England in a boat that had just landed,
with 4 torys that had stolen the boat at Fairfield Connecticut. We
immediately sent word to our two friends with whom I first helped to build
a hut, that we could now go across the sound, but they could not be found.
At sunset those that came over in the boat went off, and some of our
friends guided us through the woods to the boat, taken two oars with us
which we had made for fear we should not find any in the boat. On arriving
at the place our kind friends helped us off. We rowed very fast till we
were a great distance from land. The moon rose soon, and the wind being
fair, we arrived, we knew not where, about half an hour before day. We
went on shore and soon found it was Norwalk Ct. We had bade farewell to
Long Island for the present upon which I composed the following lines,

  O fair you well once happy land,
      Where peace and plenty dwelt
  But now op'pressed by tyrants hands,
      Where naught but fury's felt.

  Behold I leave you for awhile
      To mourn for all your Sons;
  Who daily bleed that you may smile,
      When we've your freedom won.

After being rested just as the day began to dawn we walked a short
distance to a place called the "Old Mill" where we found a guard who
hailed us at a distance, and on coming up to him kindly received us, and
invited us to his house to warm us (for he lived in Norwark) here we went
to bed at sunrise and stayed till 10 O'clock. After dinner we took our
leave of Capt Rodgers, and started for head quarters in Pennsylvania,
where the grand Army was at that time. In seven days we arrived at Valley
Forge.

    NOTE.--The above narrative is a true copy of the "Journal" written by
    my grandfather (Dr. Elias Cornelius), giving an account of his
    sufferings and treatment while in the hands of the British in New
    York, in 1777 and 1778.

    CHARLES M. TOMPKINS.

    June 4th, 1894.




[From _Putnam County Republican_, Carmel, N. Y., April 6, 1895.]

    On our second page will be found a sketch of a Revolutionary soldier
    and patriot, Dr. Elias Cornelius, who was for many years a resident of
    Baldwin Place. This is the first complete sketch of Dr. Cornelius'
    career that has been presented to the public, although he passed away
    over seventy years ago. We are indebted to our old friend, Judge
    Charles M. Tompkins, of Washington, D. C., for a copy of Dr.
    Cornelius' Journal, and also for other information which has aided us
    in compiling the sketch.--EDITOR.


DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS.

The following sketch of one whose career dates back to the beginning of
the Revolutionary War, who suffered imprisonment, endured great privations
and persecutions, and even banishment from home and estrangement of family
ties for the cause of freedom, but who came out of the ordeal unscathed
and purified--like gold tried by fire--with character strengthened and
patriotism intensified, and, after the clouds of war had rolled by and his
beloved country no longer required his services, became the most noted
physician of his time in this section of the State, and a strong and
honored pillar in the Presbyterian Church, is written with a desire to
revive and perpetuate the memory and deeds of a good man, and a noble
patriot, who was an honor to his country, to his profession, and to
Christianity, and whose life was an inspiration and a blessing to his
fellow men.

Such was Dr. Elias Cornelius, who for over forty years (1781-1823) filled
a prominent place in the active life of Putnam County and Northern
Westchester, and whose name in those olden days was a household word in
the communities through which he moved and practised his profession.

Elias Cornelius was born on Long Island in the year 1758. Besides Elias,
his father's family consisted of another son and several daughters. His
paternal ancestors came from Holland, and a coat of arms once in the
possession of Dr. Cornelius, of which we have seen a copy, indicates that
they were people of rank and distinguished for military achievements and
religious zeal which had won for them this honorable heraldic emblem.
Beyond this we know nothing of the family history, nor of Elias' boyhood
or educational advantages, except that he had not received the benefit of
a collegiate education.

At the commencement of the Revolutionary War, we find him studying
medicine under the direction of Dr. Samuel Latham, a physician of repute,
in New York City, who not only initiated his pupil into the mysteries of
the healing art and sought to convert him into a worthy disciple of
Esculapius, but also instilled into his youthful mind the principles of
patriotism and implanted in his heart the love of freedom to such an
extent, that, in spite of the persuasions and remonstrances of his parents
and other relatives, all of whom were devoted Loyalists, he resolved to
cast his lot with the Patriots.

The outgrowth of this was that he enlisted in the American Army, Jan. 1,
1777, being then only twenty years of age. On April 15, 1777, he was
appointed Surgeon's Mate in the Second Regiment of Rhode Island troops
under the command of Col. Israel Angell. His appointment was signed by
John Cochran, Surgeon General; James Craik,[1] Chief Physician and Surgeon
to the Army; Col. Israel Angell and others. Four months after this, Aug.
22, 1777, while on a reconnoitering trip, Dr. Cornelius was surprised and
taken prisoner by the British, at East Chester. He was robbed of all his
belongings, and then marched to New York under charge of Hessian Guards by
whom he was treated in an insulting and cruel manner. On his arrival there
he was lodged in the Old Sugar House prison, in which the private soldiers
were kept. Soon after he was removed from that prison and thrown into a
dungeon in the Provost Jail.

    [1] It will be remembered that Dr. Craik was the physician who
    attended Gen. Washington in his last and fatal illness, December,
    1799. Dr. Craik was then residing at Alexandria, Va.

Concerning this Jail, Mary L. Booth, in her History of New York City,
quotes from a published document of John Pintard, one of the founders of
the New York Historical Society, as follows: "The Provost was destined for
the more notorious rebels, civil, naval and military. An admission to this
modern Bastile was enough to appall the stoutest heart."

The Jail was under the superintendence of the notorious Provost Marshal
Cunningham, and no greater brute, or demon in human form, ever had charge
of captives of war. The barbarities practiced on the defenceless prisoners
by this man stand unparalleled in the history of war. It is stated that he
treated them with the utmost cruelty, heaped every possible indignity on
them, and while his victims were dying off from cold and starvation, like
cattle, he actually mingled an arsenical preparation with their poor food
in order to kill them off quicker. It is also recorded that he openly
boasted that "he had killed more of the rebels with his own hand than had
been slain by all the king's forces in America." Such was the Provost Jail
and its keeper.

Among Dr. Cornelius's friends and fellow prisoners in the jail, he
mentions Ethan Allen, the hero of Ticonderoga, and Majors Williams, Paine
and Wells.

Here he languished until Sept. 20, 1777, suffering for the necessaries of
life and receiving like all confined there, most cruel and inhuman
treatment from the jailers and guards. He was then transferred to the
upper rooms of the prison where he was confined until Jan. 9, 1778. About
this time Dr. Cornelius received a visit from his father, who, as we have
stated, was a Loyalist and a most faithful adherent of King George. In the
journal which he kept during his imprisonment (which we shall publish
later) he makes mention of this visit and records the views which his
father then expressed of his conduct. He writes that he reproached him for
his treasonable action and wept over the trouble it had brought him into,
ascribing the whole as a result of the influence which Dr. Latham, whom he
styled "a bad man," had exerted over his son. He then urged Elias to avail
himself of a free pardon which had been offered in a proclamation by the
Governor, Sir William Howe, to all who would come in voluntarily and "quit
the rebels." The young man, however, turned a deaf ear to his father's
entreaties, who left him uttering dire predictions of the results that
would follow. England, according to his views, must surely conquer the
rebellious Colonies, and his erring son would then, when it was too late,
realize the folly of his course, and without doubt meet the fate due a
traitor to his king and country.

Soon after his father's visit, he was again consigned to the dungeon, but
a few days later, on account of sickness, was removed to the hospital
which he states was "in the brick meeting house." Watching his
opportunity, he made his escape from there, Jan. 16, 1778, three days
after his arrival. He then wandered about for a number of days and endured
much exposure and suffering, but finally found, to use his own language,
"the house of some friends to America," who took him in, and afterwards
aided him to reach Long Island.

When he arrived on Long Island, he writes in his Journal that he walked
nine miles and passed his grandfather's house but did not dare go in to
ask relief for fear that the old gentleman, who was a strong Tory, would
deliver him up to the British. Shortly after, in his wanderings, he again
found friends to the American cause, and also met two men who had been
prisoners of the British, and like himself, had been fortunate enough to
make their escape without detection.

Cornelius, in company with these men, then went into the woods where they
built a hut in which they passed the remainder of the Winter, living in
constant fear, however, lest they should be discovered by the Tories in
the vicinity, and information given which would lead to their recapture by
the British soldiers. By hunting, and with occasional supplies stealthily
furnished them by a few faithful friends they managed to eke out an
existence until March 19, 1778, when not deeming it safe to remain longer
in that location, the party separated.

After this Dr. Cornelius took refuge in the house of one of his friends,
where he met two other men who had been his fellow prisoners in the
Provost Jail. As all three men were desirous of leaving Long Island, in a
few days, with the aid of friends, a boat was secured in which Cornelius
and his two companions rowed across the sound to Norwalk, Conn., where
they found shelter in the house of Capt. Rogers, one of the party. Dr.
Cornelius remained at Captain Rogers's residence only long enough to take
needed rest and refreshment, then proceeded on his way, and after a
journey of seven days, rejoined the American Army which was then in those
memorable headquarters at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. He continued in the
service until Jan. 1, 1781, and received an honorable discharge.

On retiring from the service in 1781, Dr. Cornelius settled at Yorktown,
Westchester County, and entered on the practice of his profession. Amid
the hardships and dangers of his life in the army he received vivid
religious impressions and came to be known as the "beloved physcian,"
which led him after settling there to unite with the Congregational
Church, and in 1787 he was honored with the office of deacon.

Some years later he removed from Yorktown to the northwest part of the
town of Somers, which is now known as Baldwin Place, and located on the
farm at present owned by Samuel M. Lounsbury, where he resided to the time
of his death.

Here he devoted himself with renewed energy to his profession and acquired
a large practice extending over the towns of Carmel, Somers, Yorktown,
Philipstown, and Fredericksburg. He was a close student, and by patient
study and industry accumulated a large fund of general and professional
information. Many young men studied medicine under his superintendence and
became able and successful practitioners.

Though Dr. Cornelius was an energetic man and possessed great firmness of
character, he was also very kind hearted and generous--the poor received
gratuitous medical attendance from him to a great extent, and while he
ministered to the physical ailments of his patients, like his Master, the
"Great Physician," he was ever ready to offer spiritual comfort to those
who stood in need, and kind words and advice were freely bestowed on rich
and poor alike, in such measure as the case required.

His generosity was not alone confined to individuals but the church as
well found him a faithful servant, a cheerful giver and an industrious
worker. The Presbyterian Church Society, of Mahopac Falls (formerly known
as Red Mills), to-day stands in part as a monument to his zeal and
devotion to the cause of Christ, for in 1790, he in conjunction with a few
other faithful ones effected its organization, and to the day of his death
his contributions to its support were most liberal and his interest in its
welfare unabated. He was a prime mover, too, in securing for the society
its first house of worship, taking a very active part in raising funds for
the erection of a suitable edifice, and its completion was to him a source
of pride and satisfaction. When the church was incorporated, April 7,
1806, he was chosen one of the Trustees.

In his Will he bequeathed legacies to the following religious and
charitable societies: The American Bible Society; The United Foreign
Mission Society; The American Education Society, and the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions.

His creed was loyalty to his country and to his God, and all through his
eventful and useful life his words and deeds alike attested his sincerity.
His view of life was evidently embodied in the following lines of verse
which were found pasted in the inside covers of all his books.

  "SOON will this glass of mortal life be run
  And all its fleeting vanities be gone.
  Then may I feel no more sins cruel fire,
  But to the grave in faith and peace retire;
  And weep no more for the licentious wrongs
  Of judgments rash or scourge of slanderous tongues."

Dr. Cornelius married for his first wife the daughter of a brother
physician, Dr. Brewer, who bore him several children, all of whom died in
childhood, and his wife also passed away in early life. Some years after
her decease, he married Miss Rachel Stocker, who is described as
possessing many excellent traits of character, and as being a woman of
enlarged Christian experience. She died about the year 1833. By this
marriage, five children were born to him, one son, Elias Cornelius, and
four daughters: "Sally," who married Tallman Perry, Sept. 13, 1824;
Betsey, who married Ira Tompkins, March 8, 1820; Polly, who became the
wife of Rev. William Lewis, and Nancy, who died unmarried at the early age
of nineteen years.

The son, Elias Cornelius, who was graduated from Yale College, Sept.,
1813, studied theology under Dr. Dwight, and became an eloquent and
influential minister of the Congregational Church, being licensed to
preach the Gospel, June 16, 1816, at Litchfield, Conn. For five years
(1826-1831) he filled the office of Secretary to the American Educational
Society, and through his influence and earnest labors the work of
preparing young men for the ministry received a notable impetus. In
January, 1832, he was chosen one of the Secretaries of the American Board
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, to succeed Jeremiah Evarts.

But it had been foreordained that his life work, so earnest and
successful, should be accomplished quickly, even before he had reached his
prime, for he died at Hartford, Conn., Feb. 12th, 1832, one month after
his appointment, at the age of thirty-eight years. The talented poetess,
Mrs. Sigourney, wrote some touching lines on his death. One son, Jeremiah
Evarts Cornelius, of Boston, Mass., and two daughters, Mary Cornelius and
Mrs. Sarah E. Little, of Newton Centre, Mass., are now the only living
members of his family.

The daughters, reared in this Christian home, were also noted for piety,
and like their father and brother, their walk in life abounded in good
deeds. Their highest aim seems to have been to aid and comfort those less
fortunate than themselves. They were women highly respected in the
communities where their lives were spent, and valued and devoted members
of the churches with which they were connected.

Of these, Betsey, who died Sept. 28, 1852, wife of Ira Tompkins, left
three sons and four daughters: Eli C. Tompkins, of Fond du Lac, Wis.;
Judge Charles M. Tompkins, of Washington, D. C.; Augustus Tompkins,
Burlington, Kansas; Mrs. Amelia Travis, Burlington, Kansas; Mrs. Julia
Moore, Baldwin Place, N. Y.; Mrs. Elizabeth Hyatt, Jefferson Valley, N.
Y.; and Mrs. Sarah F. Hyatt, New York City, all of whom are now living.

Mrs. Sally Perry lived and died in Bridgeport, Conn., the last member of
Dr. Cornelius' family to pass away. She left an only son, Rev. Tallman C.
Perry, now living at La Prairie, Canada.

Mrs. Polly Lewis, wife of Rev. William Lewis, died at Rising Sun, Ind.,
many years ago, leaving one son, William, who when last heard from, was
living near Auburn, N. Y.

Nancy, the youngest child, died March 23rd, 1822, aged 19 years.

Dr. Cornelius was a member of the order of Cincinnati, and his certificate
of membership bears the signatures of Washington and Knox, who were his
personal friends. This, with the "Journal" to which we have alluded, is
now in the office of the R. I. Society, of Cincinnati.

Gen. La Fayette was also an intimate friend of Dr. Cornelius, and
presented him with a sword as a token of his esteem, which is now in the
possession of his grandson, Rev. Tallman C. Perry, of La Prairie, Canada.
Dr. Cornelius died in 1823, and lies buried in the Presbyterian Cemetery
at Mahopac Falls. His tombstone bears the following inscription:

    DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS,

    Died June 13, 1823, Aged 65 years.

    "A Revolutionary Officer and Patriot, one of the principal founders of
    the Church and Society in this place, and for forty years a laborious,
    and eminently useful Physician. Embracing religion in the Camp, he was
    early distinguished for his zeal and activity in the cause of Christ,
    and having spent much of his life in its service, died in the
    possession of its hopes."

    IDA M. BLAKE.




[From _The Spirit of '76_, New York, February, 1898.]

A NEW YORK PATRIOT IN PRISON.

BY A. OAKEY HALL.

How the English in 1777 Made Dungeons in the Livingston Sugar House and
Hall of Records.


Judge Charles M. Tompkins, who has been in the Department of the Interior
at Washington since Lincoln first appointed him, as well as his
Westchester County relatives, never tire of recounting the sufferings as a
Revolutionary patriot of their grandfather, Elias Cornelius, who as a
young M. D. in the early years of the war against King George, served as
surgeon's mate in the brigade of General Varnum, whose descendants yet
illustrate the political, loyal and social circles of New York City. When
the Britons of to-day wonder why there exists so bitter a feeling in the
United States against the English government the answer would be that such
stories as grandfather Cornelius had to relate to his posterity (which was
only a sample story of tales narrated by a thousand other Continental
prisoners) emphasized the naturally bullying propensity of all John Bulls
and their inclination toward oppression and cruelty. So long as American
children receive common school education, so long will their own native
logic teach them to hate a government guilty of oppressions toward their
ancestry such as characterized the era of George III., or countenanced the
felonious raid of British troops on the National Capitol during the naval
war in President Madison's time; or learn about the selfishness of the
English cabinet during our civil war time in aiding and abetting
secession. London newspapers have but to remember that Americans thereby
have a three-fold reason for disliking English governments; and a dislike
intensified by reflection upon the three hundred years of their
oppressions and cruelties toward Irishmen. This spirit of hatred and
dislike is probably more rampant in New York than elsewhere, because its
local revolutionary history especially teems with narratives of Tory
oppression in our Colonial city and of Tory cruelties in city prisons and
prison ships and at the Wallabout on the Brooklyn side, fostered by
vindictive provost marshals. The vindictive English spirit of our
Revolutionary era has subsequently existed for the Sepoys of India. In
1777 General Howe did not blow prisoners into fragments at the cannon's
mouth as was done in 1855 in Hindostan; but the story of Dr. Cornelius'
imprisonment in New York City that now passes into history for the first
time proves how English vindictiveness could intensify. When Dr. Elias
Cornelius surrendered his medical future in this city in order to respect
his patriotic instincts by volunteering in the army of Washington, it
occupied posts in the area which is now known as the annexed district of
this city. In the summer of 1777 the hospital stores of General Varnum's
brigade stationed in the city suburbs were sadly deficient; and the city
being held by red coats it was difficult for such stores to be procured.
Wherefore it occurred to Dr. Cornelius to suggest a raid for hospital
stores upon those within the enemy's lines that were as near to the
Continental lines as in 1862 were the two hostile armies along the
Potomac. The raid was undertaken by Surgeon General Tunison of
Washington's General Hospital and Captain Alden's company of fifty. It
proved successful as to capturing medicines, bandages, lint and surgical
instruments; but in returning one section with which was Dr. Cornelius
fell into an ambush at East Chester, where after a brief engagement it had
to yield to overwhelming numbers. The horse of Dr. Cornelius was seized
and also his pistol holsters by Hessian privates, who acted, says
Cornelius, more like brigands than soldiers. They took off his military
cloak and even wrenched the buckles from his shoes and obtained thirty
pounds in money and his handkerchief, and actually showed some symptoms of
grabbing his shirt and stockings. Now, Doctor Cornelius was a
non-combatant as a surgeon and to be respected as such by the rules of
war--rules that the generals of George III. by the aid of Aboriginal
Indian allies hunting for scalps and of Hessian allies bent upon plunder
seldom respected throughout the whole Revolutionary and naval wars. The
ambush had been planned for the red coats by a Tory civilian--for, sad to
relate, the city and its suburbs abounded with Tories and traitors, and
new converts are generally the most zealous. The captors stopped at the
tavern of a Tory named Hunt who taunted Cornelius, whom he well knew,
while at the same time he was dealing out to them liquor bought as he knew
with the stolen money. There the hapless surgeon was detained all night in
close confinement with a few fellow comrades, and watched by sentinels who
threatened to blow out the brains of the first one of the party who spoke
to another.

All this, and much more which now follows of narrative appears from an
original journal of his grandfather, a copy of which Judge Tompkins
piously preserves. On the following morning the doctor and companions
were escorted under Hessian guard to Kingsbridge, and delivered over to
the custody of the Provost Guard. During the day the prisoners suffered
with hunger and thirst, being given only mouldy bread and drink from a
bucket of water into which a pint of rum was poured, and some green apples
which "were thrown at me," says the journal, "as if I were a pig in a
pen." Soon they were marched under guard toward New York, and on the way,
on a point overlooking the Hudson that would seem to have been situated
about where now is Grant's tomb, they were brought into the headquarters
of a Hessian general for triumphant exhibition. It would seem to have
occasioned great sport to the red coat officers to find captured rebels
brought before them to be baited with rough jests and coarse aspersions
upon their disloyalty; and for an hour Dr. Cornelius and his comrades
afforded the fat old beer-drinking Hessian general great delight; and such
as Spaniards feel at a bull fight. Baiting and wounding with the tongue is
often to a man of fine feeling as exquisite pain as to the bull is baiting
with swords. After the Hessian general had enjoyed his fill of rebel
sport, Dr. Cornelius was marched entirely across the island until Bowery
was reached, which, said his journal, "is three-quarters of a mile from
the City of New York." Continues Dr. Cornelius' account: "As we marched
into town Hessians, negroes and children insulted, abused and stoned us in
every way they could think of. Two of our men had become so fatigued that
we were obliged to carry them. And in this way we were paraded as a show,
to be brought before General Jones, who ordered us as prisoners into
Livingston's sugar house." Dr. Cornelius arrived there under charge of
Sergeant Walley (now of historic infamy) of the 20th regiment (Irish,) who
began with apparent delight a course of barbarous treatment. This
generation should remember that young New York (N. B.--It is a mistake to
speak of "old New York" as belonging to a century ago, for only in 1897
exists an old New York) was then intensely tory. The city was really then
"English-quite English, you know;" and the early "sons of liberty," headed
by Alexander Hamilton, the Columbia College student, had enlisted under
Washington. The sugar house in question was full of holes in its roof, and
the prisoners kept in the upper stories were after every rain
intentionally exposed to chills and rheumatism.

"You are a rebel doctor, eh?" cried Jailer Walley to Cornelius; "then you
can dose yourself;" and he confiscated the doctor's commission, which was
signed by Surgeon General John Cochrane (grandfather of that namesake who
is known to this generation as Alderman, Police Justice, Congressman,
Union General and President of the Society of the Cincinnati.) The
commission was also signed by Washington's staff physician, Doctor Craig,
who it will be recalled medically ministered to the dying ex-President.
Dr. Cornelius' father was a tory living on the Sound shore of Long Island
and had resented the rebel proclivities of his son--at this time not yet
of age--and blamed his medical preceptor, the famous Doctor Samuel Latham
Mitchell, afterwards the first Federal Senator from New York, for
instilling rebel sentiments. Being without funds and clothing the captured
Cornelius begged for pen, ink and paper, so as to write to his father; but
Jailer Walley not only refused but struck him in the face with his cane
and reduced his allowance of mouldy bread and water. The father, however,
learned of his son's capture and imprisonment through the tory "Rivington
Gazette," and came to see him; but only to urge him to obey Lord Howe's
proclamation, which gave pardon to all rebels who should return to their
allegiance unto King George. Dr. Cornelius indignantly declined, and the
old tory father left his son to his fate; but after the war ended that son
was enabled to save his father's property from confiscation. New York
rebels were then situated toward Captain General Lord Howe much as Havana
rebels are by the forgiving proclamation of Captain General Weyler.

From the sugar house prison Dr. Cornelius was removed to the Provost
Marshal's prison on the site of the present Hall of Records, in which
still stands portions of the old prison wall. The doctor, because he had
refused the clemency of Lord Howe, was clapped into a basement dungeon
where he encountered a fellow prisoner--a ship captain of Philadelphia
named Chatham, who had as captive refused to pilot a Britsh troop ship up
the Delaware. Provost Marshal Cunningham--probably the most cruel and
inhuman jailer known to history, and because of his devilish proclivities
kept in office to enforce the early repressive measures that the British
adopted towards conquering the spirit of rebels--inflicted new indignities
upon Cornelius and the others, and not only refused the latter the offices
of the provost physician, but punished Dr. Cornelius for attempting to
medically succor them. "But they will die," remonstrated the doctor. "They
are sent here for that purpose," rejoined Cunningham; "and His Gracious
Majesty will forgivingly bury them in Potters Field." That pauper cemetery
was then the area now Washington Square. Here Dr. Cornelius was kept from
Aug. 25 to Sep. 12 without change of linen or clothing or water for
ablutions. Among the prisoners Dr. Cornelius found brave Ethan Allen, who
three years previously had become the hero of Ticonderoga, but had been
taken prisoner in the General Montgomery expedition against Montreal.
Ethan Allen narrated to the doctor, who copied the narrative into his
diary, how he had been put on board a man-of-war in the St. Lawrence,
chained flat on his back during six months in a corner of the hold, and
twice carried on shore in England to be hanged, once also on the coast of
Ireland, and a third time at Halifax. Allen's bravery was not then fully
known to the doctor, who quaintly writes in his diary, "there seemed to
have been much antipathy to Allen." He was not aware either that all those
cruelties and these of Cunningham were brought up in Parliament by friends
therein of the colonists and expressly by vote approved by Lord North's
bloodthirsty administration. And yet the London _Times_ continues to
wonder why so many Americans dislike the country of Queen Victoria's
grandfather, who countenanced the cruelties and oppressions of McKinley's
ancestral people. Adds the Cornelius journal: "I frequently saw beaten
with canes and ramrods women who came to the prison windows to speak to
their husbands, sons or brothers; some of whom would be put on bread and
water diet in dungeons merely for asking that cold water be passed to them
through the bars." When General Clinton and a British force captured Fort
Montgomery its officers were brought to Cunningham's care, some of them
wounded, whom Dr. Cornelius begged to attend surgically only to receive
refusals with curses. The London _Times_ criticizes Weyler for his
treatment of prisoners, and yet he is only in Havana adopting the English
precedents set by Lord Howe and Provost Marshal Cunningham in Colonial New
York City. Soon, however, news came that General Burgoyne had capitulated
to General Gates at Saratoga, when the Cunningham imprisonment modified
somewhat. "We are now even given each a little butter, and a gill of rice
to each, and our dried peas are allowed to be boiled," quaintly and
pathetically writes the doctor; and in January, 1778, he adds, "good bread
and beef and wood to burn." But soon Cornelius was taken back to the sugar
house, where he found "the Hessian guards stealing our clothes and bed
blankets and kicking and beating us." He became so ill, but had made
himself so useful, medically, to the British surgeon that when "the rebel
physician" became ill the former sent him "to the brick church hospital in
the street called Wall." From this hospital the doctor one night escaped,
and in a blizzard traversed the island up as high as opposite Hell Gate
with almost incredible exposure, suffering and romantic incidents; whence
he crossed by boat to Long Island and was cared for by secretive patriots.
There is a pathetic entry in the diary--"passed at night by the house in
which I was born and dared not go in lest my grandfather, a devoted
loyalist should return me to prison." He eventually escaped by boat into
Norwalk, Connecticut, and was enabled to rejoin the army, which was now at
Valley Forge in Pennsylvania. There he shared the terrors of that patient
and suffering waiting of Washington and his patriot soldiers that history
has made memorable, and in his surgical capacity Dr. Cornelius was of
great service to the Continental camps. Two years more he continued in
surgical army duty, but through illness was obliged to seek his honorable
discharge in the very year of Cornwallis' surrender at Yorktown. It was in
a village by that name in the north of Westchester County that he settled
as physician, but passed most of his declining years in the town of
Somers, dying there in 1823. And many now old men residing in it recall
hearing, when they were young, from the lips of old Dr. Cornelius the
stories of his sufferings in New York City English prisons. He had a
clerical son, who succeeded the father of William M. Evarts as Secretary
of the American Board of Missions, and who in his turn had a son whom he
named after the elder Evarts. The old army surgeon's grandchildren reside
in many parts of the United States, and one of them, Mrs. Hyatt, in this
city. His sword, a gift from Lafayette, whom he attended in an illness,
abides on British soil in the keeping of a clerical grandson, the Rev.
Tallman C. Perry, of LaPrairie, Canada. And summer residents at Mahopac
Falls can in its cemetery read the tombstone of the great patriotic
sufferer in the British prisons of this city, whose war journal in the
possession of the Rhode Island branch of the Cincinnati Society is the
basis of the foregoing narrative.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Journal of Dr. Elias Cornelius, a
Revolutionary Surgeon, by Elias Cornelius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF DR. ELIAS CORNELIUS ***

***** This file should be named 37035-8.txt or 37035-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/0/3/37035/

Produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
