The Project Gutenberg EBook of Emergency Childbirth, by 
U. S. Department of Defence and U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Emergency Childbirth
       A Reference Guide for Students of the Medical Self-help
       Training Course, Lesson No. 11

Author: U. S. Department of Defence
        U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

Release Date: October 14, 2008 [EBook #26923]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH ***




Produced by David Reed and Al Haines.




U



EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH



  A REFERENCE GUIDE FOR STUDENTS OF
  THE MEDICAL SELF-HELP TRAINING COURSE

  LESSON NO. 11



ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We wish to acknowledge with grateful appreciation the many services
provided by the American Medical Association, through the Committee on
Disaster Medical Care, Council on National Security, Board of Trustees
and staff, in the preparation of this handbook.

From the inception of studies to determine emergency health techniques
and procedures, the Association gave valuable assistance and support.
The Committee on Disaster Medical Care of the Council on National
Security, AMA, reviewed the material in its various stages of
production, and made significant contributions to the content of the
handbook.


  A joint publication of the
  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
  Office of Civil Defense

  and the

  U. S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE
  Public Health Service
  Health Services and Mental Health Administration
  Division of Emergency Health Services
  5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20852

  Reprinted December 1970



EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH

What To Do

   1. Let nature be your best helper. Childbirth is a very natural act.
   2. At first signs of labor assign the best qualified person to remain
      with mother.
   3. Be calm; reassure mother.
   4. Place mother and attendant in the most protected place in the
      shelter.
   5. Keep children and others away.
   6. Have hands as clean as possible.
   7. Keep hands away from birth canal.
   8. See that baby breathes well.
   9. Place baby face down across mother's abdomen.
  10. Keep baby warm.
  11. Wrap afterbirth with baby.
  12. Keep baby with mother constantly.
  13. Make mother as comfortable as possible.
  14. Identify baby.


What Not To Do

   1. DO NOT hurry.
   2. DO NOT pull on baby, let baby be born naturally.
   3. DO NOT pull on cord, let the placenta (afterbirth) come naturally.
   4. DO NOT cut and tie the cord until baby _AND_ afterbirth have
      been delivered.
   5. DO NOT give medication.

DO NOT HURRY--LET NATURE TAKE HER COURSE.

If it becomes necessary for families to take refuge in fallout shelters
there will undoubtedly be a number of babies born under difficult
conditions and without medical assistance.

Every expectant mother and the members of her family should do all they
can to prepare for emergency births. They will need to know what to do
and what to have ready. (See "Expectant Mother's Emergency Kit.")



SPECIAL SAFEGUARDS

A pregnant woman should be especially careful to protect herself from
radiation exposure. She should have the most protected corner of the
shelter and not be allowed to risk outside exposure. She should not
lift heavy objects or push heavy furniture. If food shortages exist,
she should be given some preference.

Fear and possible exertion involved during an atomic attack will
probably increase the number of premature births and of miscarriages.



PREPARATIONS

Usually there is plenty of time after the beginning of first labor
pains to get ready for the delivery. Signs of labor are low backache,
bloody-tinged mucous strings passing from the birth canal, or a gush of
water from the birth canal.

The mother will need a clean surface to lie on. Her bed should be so
arranged that the mattress is well protected by waterproof sheeting or
pads made from several thicknesses of paper covered with cloth. Cover
these protective materials with a regular bedsheet.

A warm bed should be made ready in advance for the baby. It may be a
clothes basket, a box lined with a blanket, or a bureau drawer placed
on firm chairs or on a table. If possible, warm the baby's blanket,
shirt, and diapers with a hot water bottle. Warm bricks or a bag of
table salt that has been heated can be used if a hot water bottle is
not available.

A knife, a pair of scissors, or a razor should be thoroughly cleansed
and sterilized in preparation for cutting the umbilical cord. If there
is no way to boil water to sterilize them (the preferred method of
sterilization), sterilize them by submersion in 70 percent isopropyl
alcohol solution for at least 20 minutes or up to 3 hours, if possible.
Sterile tapes for tying the umbilical cord will be needed. (Do not
remove them from their sterile wrappings until you are ready to use
them.) If no tapes are available, a clean shoestring or a strip of
sheeting (folded into a narrow tie) can be boiled and used wet as a
cord tie substitute.



STAGES OF LABOR

Labor is the term used to describe the process of childbirth. It
consists of the contractions of the wall of the womb (uterus) which
force the baby and, later, the afterbirth (placenta) into the outside
world. Labor is divided into three stages. Its duration varies greatly
in different persons and under different circumstances.

During the first and longest stage, the small opening at the lower end
of the womb gradually stretches until it is large enough to let the
baby pass through. The contractions (tightening) of the uterus, which
bring about this stretching and move the baby along into the birth
canal, cause pains known as labor pains.

These pains, usually beginning as an aching sensation in the small of
the back, turn in a short time into regularly recurring cramplike pains
in the lower abdomen. By placing your hand on the mother's abdomen just
above the navel, you can feel each tightening of the uterus as an
increasing firmness or hardness. It lasts for 30 to 60 seconds. The
pains disappear each time the uterus relaxes.

At first these pains occur from 10 to 20 minutes apart and are not very
severe. They may even stop completely for a while and then start up
again. The mother should rest when she is tired but need not be lying
down continuously. She may sleep between tightenings if she can. She
can take a little water or perhaps tea during the entire labor process.
She should urinate frequently during labor so the bladder will be as
empty as possible at the time of birth.

The skin in the vaginal area of the mother should be sponged
occasionally with soapy water. Special attention should be given to
cleaning the inner sides of the thighs and the rectal area with heavy
lather. Soap or water should not be allowed to enter the vagina.

A slight, watery, bloodstained discharge from the vagina normally
accompanies labor pains or occurs before the pains begin.

For first babies, this stage of labor may continue for as long as 18
hours or more. For women who have had a previous baby, it may last only
2 or 3 hours.

The end of this first stage is usually signaled by the sudden pressing
of a large gush of water (a pint or so), caused by the normal breaking
of the bag of waters which surrounds the baby in the mother's womb. For
some women, the bag of waters breaks before labor begins or perhaps as
the first sign of its beginning. This should not cause the mother or
those helping her any concerns. It usually does not seriously affect
the birth.

Through this first stage of labor, the mother does not have to work to
help the baby be born. She should not try to push the baby down, but
should try to relax her muscles. She can help do this by taking deep
breaths with her mouth open during each tightening.

[Illustration: A. At full term, or after 40 weeks of pregnancy, the
baby is ready to be born. The cervix through which baby must leave the
uterus is shown clearly here, still closed. The contractions of the
muscles of the uterus will open the cervix, and force the baby down
through the vagina, or birth canal, to the outside.]

[Illustration: B. At the end of the first stage of labor the cervix is
completely open and the baby's head is beginning to come down through
the vagina. Contractions begin in the lower back and later are felt in
the lower abdomen. At the time shown here contractions are probably
coming every 2 minutes, lasting 40-60 seconds and very strong.]

[Illustration: C. The first stage of labor usually lasts several hours
and is hard work. The mother needs to relax, rest, and be reassured.
Give her water and fruit juices. In this picture the second stage of
labor is well along. It is shorter than the first stage and the mother
will now be pushing down with each contraction, helping to force the
baby into the world. ]

[Illustration: D. The head of the baby has been partially born. This
shows the usual position with the face down and the back of the head
up. The bag of waters in which the baby is enclosed throughout the
pregnancy may have broken at the beginning of labor, before or during
the first stage. It may break now, or have to be torn with the fingers.]

[Illustration: E. Here you see the baby's head turned to the right as
is usual. The shoulders are about to be born. The head must turn so
that the baby's body can fit into the birth canal and come through more
easily. After the birth of the baby there will be further uterine
contractions and the placenta will be separated from the uterine wall
and expelled.]



CHANGE OF FEELING

Gradually the time between the labour pains grows shorter and the pains
increase in severity until they are coming every 2 to 3 minutes. It
will not be long now before the baby is born.

At this stage the mother will notice a change. Instead of the tightness
in the lower abdomen and pain across the back, she will feel a bearing
down sensation almost as if she were having a bowel movement. This
means the baby is moving down.

When this happens, she should lie down and get ready for the birth of
the child. The tightening and bearing down feelings will come more
frequently and be harder.

She will have an uncontrollable urge to push down, which she may do.
But she should not work too hard at it because the baby will be brought
down without her straining too hard. There will probably be more blood
showing at this point.

_The person attending the delivery should thoroughly scrub hands with
soap and water. Never touch the vagina or put fingers inside for any
reason. The mother also should keep her hands away from the vagina._

As soon as a bulge begins to appear in the vaginal area and part of the
baby is visible, the mother should stop pushing down. She should try to
breathe like a panting dog with her mouth open in order not to push the
baby out too rapidly with consequent tearing of her tissue.

She should keep her knees up and legs separated so that the person
helping her can get at the baby more easily.



MOMENT OF BIRTH

_The person helping the mother should always let the baby be born by
itself. No attempt should be made to pull the baby out in any way._

Usually the baby's head appears first, the top of the head presenting
and the face downward. Infrequently the baby will be born in a
different position, sometimes buttocks first, occasionally foot or arm
first. In these infrequent situations, patience without interference in
the birth process is most important. The natural process of delivery,
although sometimes slower, will give the child and the mother the best
chance of a safe and successful birth.

The baby does not need to be born in a hurry, but usually about a
minute after the head appears the mother will have another bearing down
feeling and push the shoulders and the rest of the baby out.

As the baby is being expelled, the person helping the mother should
support the baby on her hands and arms so that the baby will avoid
contact with any blood or waste material on the bed.

If there is still a membrane from the water sac over the baby's head
and face at delivery, it should immediately be taken between the
fingers and torn so that the water inside will run out and the baby can
breathe.

If, as sometimes happens, the cord, which attaches the child from its
navel to the placenta in the mother's womb, should be wrapped around
the baby's neck when his head and neck appear, try to slip it quickly
over his head so that he will not strangle.

After the baby is born, wrap a fold of towel around his ankles to
prevent slipping and hold him up by the heels with one hand, taking
care that the cord is slack. To get a good safe grip, insert one finger
between the baby's ankles. Do not swing or spank the baby. Hold him
over the bed so that he cannot fall far if he should slip from your
grasp. The baby's body will be very slippery. Place your other hand
under the baby's forehead and bend its head back slightly so that the
fluid and mucus can run out of its mouth. When the baby begins to cry,
lay him on his side on the bed close enough to the mother to keep the
cord slack.

The baby will usually cry within the first minute. If he does not cry
or breathe within 2 or 3 minutes, use mouth-to-mouth artificial
respiration.

_Very little force should be used in blowing air into the baby's
mouth_. A short puff of breath about every 5 seconds is enough. As soon
as the baby starts to breathe or cry, mouth-to-mouth breathing should
be stopped.



CUTTING THE CORD

There should be no hurry to cut the cord. Take as much time as
necessary to prepare the ties and sharp instruments.

You will need two pieces of sterile white cotton tape or two pieces of
1-inch-wide sterile gauze bandage about 9 inches long to use to tie the
cord. (If you do not have sterile material for tying the cord but do
have facilities for boiling water, strips of sheeting--boiled for 15 to
20 minutes to make them sterile--can be used.) Tie the umbilical cord
with the sterile tape in two places, one about 4 inches from the baby
and the other 2 inches farther along the cord toward the mother, making
two or more simple knots at each place. Cut the cord between these two
ties with a clean sharp instrument such as a knife, razor blade, or
scissors.

A sterile dressing about 4 inches square should be placed over the cut
end of the cord at the baby's navel and should be held in place by
wrapping a "bellyband" or folded diaper around the baby. If a sterile
dressing is not available, no dressing or bellyband should be used.
Regardless of whether a dressing is applied or not, no powder,
solution, or disinfectant of any kind should be put on the cord or
navel.

If the afterbirth has not yet been expelled, cover the end of the
umbilical cord attached to it (and now protruding from the vagina) with
a sterile dressing and tie it in place.

[Illustration: Cut between the square knot by bringing the left tape
over right tape for first loop and right tape over left for second
loop. Tighten each loop firmly as tied. Use scissors or a razor blade
to cut cord.]



THIRD STAGE OF LABOR

Usually a few minutes after the baby is born (although sometimes an
hour or more will elapse) the mother will feel a brief return of the
labor pains which had ceased with the birth. These are due to
contractions of the uterus as it seeks to expel the afterbirth. _Do not
pull on the cord to hurry this process_.

Some bleeding is to be expected at this stage. If there is a lot of
bleeding before the afterbirth is expelled, the attendant should gently
massage the mother's abdomen, just above the navel. This will help the
uterus to tighten, help the afterbirth come out, and reduce bleeding.

It may be desirable to put the baby almost immediately to the mother's
breast for a minute or two on each side even though the mother will
have no milk as yet. This helps the uterus contract, and reduces the
bleeding.

Someone should stand by the mother and occasionally massage her abdomen
gently for about an hour after the afterbirth is expelled. After that
the mother should feel the rounded surface of the uterus through the
abdomen and squeeze firmly but gently with her fingers. The bedding
should be cleansed and the mother sponged. Washing and wiping of the
vaginal area should always be done from the front to the back in order
to avoid contamination. A sanitary napkin should be applied.

Keep the mother warm with blankets. She may have a slight chill. Give
her a warm (not hot) drink of sweetened tea, milk, or boullion. Wipe
her hands and face with a damp towel. She may drop off to sleep.

The mother's diet after delivery may include any available foods she
wishes. She may eat or drink as soon as she wants to, and she should be
encouraged to drink plenty of fluids, especially milk. Canned milk can
be used and made more palatable by diluting with equal parts of water
and adding sugar, eggs, chocolate, or other flavoring.

For the first 24 or 48 hours after delivery, the mother will continue
to have some cramping pains in the lower abdomen which may cause a
great deal of discomfort. Aspirin may help relieve these afterpains.
She should empty her bladder every few hours for 2 days following the
birth. If her bowels do not move within 3 days after delivery she
should be given an enema.



MISCARRIAGE

If a pregnant woman shows evidence of bleeding, she should restrict her
activities and rest in bed in an effort to prevent possible loss of the
baby. If a miscarriage does occur, keep the patient flat with the foot
of the bed elevated from 12 to 18 inches to retard vaginal bleeding.
Keep her warm and quiet, and give her fluids.



EXPECTANT MOTHER'S EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH KIT

The public health and civil defense agencies of one State have planned
a 1 1/2-pound emergency childbirth kit made up of basic supplies that
can be carried in a 1-yard-square receiving blanket.

The kit consists of the following:

  One-yard square of outing flannel, hemmed (receiving blanket).
  Plastic (polyethylene flexible film) for outer wrapping of the
    kit if desired. (_Do not_ wrap the baby in this plastic film.)
  One or two diapers.
  Four sanitary napkins (wrapped).
  Adhesive tape identification strips for mother and baby.
  Short pencil.
  Soap.
  Sterile package containing:
    Small pair of blunt-end scissors (cheapest scissors will do),
      or a safety razor blade with a guard on one side.
    Four pieces of white cotton tape, 1/2 inch wide and 9 inches
      long.[1]
    Four cotton balls.
    Roll of 3-inch gauze bandage.
    Six 4-inch squares of gauze.[1]
    Two or more safety pins.

[1] You will actually use only two tapes for tying the umbilical cord.
The two extras are included  as a safeguard in case one or two should
be dropped or soiled. Extra 4-inch squares of gauze also are included.

[Illustration: Emergency childbirth kit]

Instructions such as those contained in this chapter also should be
considered a part of the emergency childbirth kit.

To make the kit ready to carry, lay the plastic (if used) out flat, and
lay receiving blanket out flat on top of the plastic. Place the
diapers, sterile package, soap, sanitary napkins, identification tapes,
pencil and instructions in the center. Pull two opposite corners of the
receiving blanket and plastic together and tie. Do the same with the
other opposite corners, pulling each side together well so that nothing
will fall out. Then tightly knot the loose ends together in the same
way, leaving an opening so that the kit can be slipped over the arm for
carrying the kit while leaving the hands free.

Such an emergency delivery kit will weigh about 1 1/2 pounds. The
contents suggested are basic essentials only, for extreme emergency.
Much more could be added, but the extra weight might mean leaving
behind some other items needed for survival. Additional supplies could
be stored in your home shelter to be ready in the event the birth takes
place there. In the case there is no need for an emergency delivery,
either in the home, shelter or in some evacuation situation, the
supplies in the kit can be used in home care of the baby.



IDENTIFICATION TAPES

In emergency situations, identification will be particularly important,
especially if the birth should take place in a group shelter rather
than a family shelter, or in an evacuation situation.

Two wide strips of adhesive tape will be needed--one long enough to go
around the mother's wrist, and the other long enough to go around the
baby's ankle. Information should be written on these strips as shown
below.

[Illustration: For mother--Write parents' names, blood types, and
mother's Rh factor, street address, and whether it is a first or later
child.]

[Illustration: For baby--Write date and hour of birth and parents'
names and address.]











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Emergency Childbirth, by 
U. S. Department of Defence and U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH ***

***** This file should be named 26923.txt or 26923.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/2/26923/

Produced by David Reed and Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
