The Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Volume 54, No.
3, July, 1900, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The American Missionary -- Volume 54, No. 3, July, 1900

Author: Various

Release Date: April 8, 2009 [EBook #28541]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY, JULY, 1900 ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)







The American Missionary

(QUARTERLY)

  July }
  Aug. } 1900
  Sept.}

  Vol. LIV.
  No. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: COURT SQUARE THEATRE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS. PLACE OF
FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

THE CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

FOURTH AVENUE AND TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as Second-Class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                                 PAGE

  FINANCIAL--NINE MONTHS                                           97

  EDITORIAL NOTES                                                  97

  INDIAN PROGRESS                                                 102

  LIGHT AND SHADE                                                 104

  COMMENCEMENT EXERCISES:

    FISK UNIVERSITY, TENN.                                        106
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE, ALA.                                       108
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, LA.                                      110
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.                                    113
    GRANDVIEW INSTITUTE, TENN.                                    115
    PLEASANT HILL ACADEMY, TENN.                                  115

  FORT BERTHOLD INDIAN SCHOOL, N. D.                              116

  A TRIBUTE TO REV. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D.                       118

  RICHARD SALTER STORRS, D.D.                                     119

  OBITUARY--PROF. A. K. SPENCE--REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.        121

  PORTO RICO NOTES                                                122

  LOSS OF SUPPLIES FOR ALASKA                                     124

  DEPARTMENT OF CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR                                125

  RECEIPTS                                                        128

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS                                     142

  SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S AND CHILDREN'S WORK               144

       *       *       *       *       *

THE 54th ANNUAL MEETING

OF THE

American Missionary Association

WILL BE HELD IN

SPRINGFIELD, MASS.

October 23-25, 1900.

SERMON: REV. NEWELL DWIGHT HILLIS, D.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

The AMERICAN MISSIONARY presents new form, fresh material and
generous illustrations for 1900. This magazine is published by the
American Missionary Association quarterly. Subscription rate fifty
cents per year.

Many wonderful missionary developments in our own country during this
stirring period of national enlargement are recorded in the columns
of this magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. LIV.     JULY, 1900.     NO. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCIAL.

Nine Months, Ending June 30th.


The receipts are $237,141.25, exclusive of Reserve Legacy Account, an
increase of $24,922,63 compared with last year. There has been an
increase of $15,751.36 in donations, $5,800.96 in estates, $852,26 in
income and $2,518.05 in tuition.

The expenditures are $249,148.75, an increase of $21,699.95 compared
with last year. The debt showing June 30th, this year, is
$12,007.50--last year at the same time $15,230.18.

We appeal to churches, Sunday-schools, Christian Endeavor Societies,
Woman's Missionary Societies and individuals, and also to executors
of estates, to secure as large a sum as possible for remittance in
July, August and September. The fiscal year closes September 30th. We
hope to receive from all sources every possible dollar. The
Association closed the year 1897-98 without debt, and the year
1898-99 without debt, and it earnestly desires to close this year,
1899-1900 without debt.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Annual Meeting, Oct. 23d-25th.]

The Fifty-fourth Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association is to be held in Springfield, Mass., October 23d-25th.
The Court Square Theatre has been secured, containing the largest
auditorium in the city. A great gathering is anticipated. Rev. Newell
Dwight Hillis, D.D., will preach the sermon. Reports from the large
and varied fields will be presented by missionaries. The fields now
reach from Porto Rico to Alaska, and present various and interesting
conditions of life. The great problems of national and missionary
importance that are pressing themselves upon the attention of
Christian patriots everywhere will be ably discussed. Contributing
churches, local conferences and state associations are entitled to
send delegates to this convention of the American Missionary
Association.


[Sidenote: A New Departure Program.]

Santee Training School presented a unique and interesting program at
the closing exercises, June 15th, 1900. "A New Departure Program for
Closing of School" was the title upon the printed page. The program
was divided into two parts. Part first was confined to history. The
general subject presented in the papers was "The Development of
Civilized Ways of Living." One of the Indian pupils read a paper on
"First Ways of Getting Food and Clothing." Another on "First
Dwellings." The future as well as the past in race development and
elevation was considered. "Beginning to Provide for the Future" was
the subject of another paper. "Clothing" was discussed in relation to
its production and value.

The second part of this "New Departure Program" presented science in
a practical and helpful way. The general subject was "Natural Forces
are for Human Use." Interesting and valuable papers were presented on
such themes as "Wind Mills," "Non-conduction in Electricity," "Plant
Breathing," "Food Stored," and other suggestive and important
subjects. Throughout abundant illustrations were presented impressing
upon these Indian boys and girls important lessons in independence
and self-control and self-help essential to development and progress.
Santee is to be commended surely for this new departure, which must
prove not only interesting but of permanent value in race elevation.


[Sidenote: A New Departure Program.]

The attention of the whole world has been focalized on China during
the past few weeks. Many hearts are deeply anxious for friends who
are in the midst of this upheaval and whose lives are threatened.
Beginning with mobs instigated by a secret society, apparently
without preconcertion, a state bordering upon war now exists. Whether
the Empress Dowager is at the head of this movement it seems
impossible to decide. The conservative element of the Chinese is
certainly in sympathy with the Boxers in their effort to exterminate
the "foreign devils." What the outcome of this insane uprising and
mad onslaught involving substantial war against the civilized nations
of the world will be, no prophet of modern times can foretell. Many
of us wait with anxious and sorrowful hearts for messages which we
hope and yet fear to receive, lest they confirm our apprehension and
alarm.

We hope to present in the next issue of the MISSIONARY an article
from Rev. Jee Gam, the missionary of the A. M. A. in San Francisco,
giving his views and interpretations of the trouble in China. This
Association is closely related to the great work in this Empire
through the missions in our own country among the Chinese. How much
the civilized nations are responsible for the present condition
through their eager and often ill-advised efforts to absorb the
territory, or to gain political and commercial advantages, is a
serious problem. The need of aggressive and earnest work for the
Chinese who come to our own country is emphasized by these alarming
conditions. Hundreds should be sent back as missionaries to their own
people. We hold the key to the solution of foreign missions in
Africa, China and Japan in members of these races in our own country.


[Sidenote: A United Annual Meeting.]

Several state and local conferences have passed resolutions in favor
of one annual meeting for all our six missionary societies. Such a
convention would probably occupy a week. Each society would have
representation during such a portion of the time as the magnitude of
the work represented demanded. The general sentiment seems to be that
the Sabbath should be used as a day of missionary and spiritual
arousement, for the general interests of the Kingdom of God, as
represented through our denomination. This plan met the cordial
approval of the Home Missionary Convention in Detroit recently. It is
certainly worthy of the careful consideration of all our societies.


[Sidenote: The Testimony of Prof. Roark.]

Prof. R. M. Roark, of the Kentucky State College, at the commencement
of Chandler Normal School, Lexington, Ky., bore the following
testimony to the strength and value of the negroes of the South:
"Forty years ago the race had nothing; now property in the hands of
the negro has an assessed valuation of nearly five hundred million
dollars. Not a few individuals are worth seventy-five thousand to one
hundred thousand dollars. Forty years ago it was a violation of the
law to teach a negro; now there are thousands of children in good
schools; and there are two hundred higher institutes of learning for
negroes, with an attendance of two hundred thousand or more. There
are many successful teachers, editors, lawyers, doctors and ministers
who are negroes. All these professions are fully and ably represented
here, in conservative and aristocratic Lexington, and as regards
these men and women there is no race problem. Worth, honesty, clear
knowledge, self-respect and independent support lie at the foundation
of any citizenship, white or black. May these young graduates carry
these with them into the life conflict, and be the leaders of their
race into the widest opportunities of free American citizenship."


[Sidenote: Splendid Benefactions.]

Mr. Rossiter Johnson has recently compiled a list of bequests to
benevolent objects during the last year in the United States. This is
a remarkable showing. The grand total is nearly sixty-three million
dollars. The year previous it reached the good sum of thirty-eight
million, and in 1897, forty-five million. In three years, therefore,
over one hundred and forty million dollars have been bestowed by
generous men and women for charitable and educational objects. There
never has been a time in the history of the world when generosity and
riches were so often held in possession of the same person as to-day.


[Sidenote: Important.]

Mr. R. H. Learell, of the Class of 1901, at Harvard University, was
awarded the first prize in the Harvard Bowdoin Series. His subject
was "The Race Problems in the South."

An interesting and valuable lecture was delivered before the students
of Western Reserve University, Ohio, by Prof. O. H. Tower, Ph.D. His
subject was "The Food of the Alabama Negro and its Relation to His
Mental and Moral Development."


[Sidenote: A Useful Record.]

LeMoyne Normal Institute, at Memphis, Tenn., has just completed the
twenty-ninth year of its history. It was founded by the American
Missionary Association in October, 1871. The work of the school has
grown into large proportions. The enrollment of students for the year
has numbered 725 in all grades. More than 200 of these have studied
in the normal department. They are thus fitting themselves for
teaching among their people in the public and private schools of the
state.

The graduating class of 1900 consisted of twenty. Dr. LeMoyne, of
Washington, Pa., after whom the institute is named, gave the ground
and the buildings and the original outlay. The American Missionary
Association has maintained the work during these twenty-nine years.
The Alumni Association of the institute has contributed generously in
proportion to their means to the work at the school. The Alumni have
been much interested in the development of the industrial department,
and have contributed for that purpose. Woodworking, cooking and
nursing classes will be conducted in the school next year, offering
still larger opportunities for the training of these young people for
a larger and more useful life-work.


[Sidenote: Whittier High School.]

The closing exercises of Whittier High School were held in the
Congregational Church, on the 18th of May. This school is situated in
the Highlands of North Carolina. It reaches the young people of a
considerable area, and is an influence for large good among them.
Among the speeches or essays presented at the closing exercises, was
one entitled: "The South, Her Strength and Weakness." It is a hopeful
sign that the young men of the South, who are to be the leaders in
their section, are seriously considering these problems. In the "New
South," a large element of strength and progress will come from the
educated young men of the Highlands. They are somewhat slow to be
moved, but are strong, steadfast and courageous in the defense of
that which they believe to be right, when they do move.


[Sidenote: Grit that Wins.]

In one of our schools among the American Highlanders a young
mountaineer, then scarcely out of his teens, applied for membership.
When asked what funds he had to support him in his proposed study, he
replied: "Only fifty cents." He had dependent upon him two sisters, a
brother and his mother. It seemed rather limited capital for such an
undertaking. He went to work, however, cutting logs, built a
log-cabin, moved into it with his family, and with an eagerness that
can scarcely be appreciated by those who have had larger
opportunities, went to his study in the schoolroom. It is not
necessary to say that such grit and devotion won for him success. He
has fitted himself for Christian instruction among his people, and is
rapidly becoming a leader. This young man, however, is not an
individual but a type of hundreds of such Highland lads and lassies
who are struggling with great self-sacrifice for an education in our
American Missionary Association schools.


[Sidenote: Prepared for Life Work.]

The graduating class from Williamsburg Academy, Kentucky, numbers
three. They are all from the State of Kentucky, but from different
counties. The mountain people only are represented. One contemplates
the study of medicine next fall. One expects to teach. The other, a
young lady, will probably remain at home for a time. All are
Christians and in active Christian work.


[Sidenote: Grand View Institute, Tennessee.]

This school, among the Highlanders, has closed a most successful
year. The following item comes from the principal: "The young men
have held a mid-week prayer meeting twice each week during the
month. These meetings were well attended, and much interest was
manifested. At our last mid-week service, before the closing of the
school, our little church was well filled, and a large number took
part in the service. The topic for the evening was 'Some of the
benefits I have received during the school year in Grand View.' The
meeting was exceptionally impressive. Many of these students have,
during the year, taken Christ into their hearts and lives, and this,
after all, we feel is the 'one thing needful.'"


[Sidenote: Manual of Savannah Congregational District.]

Through the courtesy of the Moderator, the manual of this conference
has been presented to the editor of the MISSIONARY. It contains the
constitution and by-laws, and a brief historical sketch of this group
of churches in Georgia. It is an interesting document. Among other
things, it illustrates the desire of these churches to have an
educated and upright ministry. Article XII of their constitution
reads, in part, as follows: "Congregationalists have always believed
in a Godly and educated ministry. To meet the wants of local
conditions, a three years' course of study shall be provided for in
the by-laws, for all who are not graduates of normal, college
preparatory or college classes.... The by-laws shall provide a four
years' course of conference study, leading up to the printed
certificate. Any person holding a printed certificate shall be
addressed as Reverend, preach without annual examination, on
condition of good behavior, and may be ordained if called by a church
to be its pastor.... Ordained preachers coming to us from bodies
having a lower standard shall pursue our four years' course of study
and pass annual examinations, if they are under fifty years of age."

This is certainly an earnest and systematic effort on the part of our
brethren of these churches to establish higher educational and
ethical standards on the part of the ministers in that state. The
benefit will accrue not only to our Congregational Churches, but to
all others in the state.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIAN PROGRESS.

BY REV. C. L. HALL.


[Sidenote: Old and New.]

On May 26th there was a high wind over the prairie. It hindered the
carpenter who was trying to frame the bell-tower of the new chapel.
The chapel stands aloft in the center of the Ree Indian settlement.
It is a shining mark, seen in the June sunlight, for miles up and
down the Missouri bench lands. The prairie around it is dotted with
Indian homes. The winds could not stop the building nor overturn it.
Other work the wind did finish. That was the overthrow of the old
heathen place of worship which stood a little more than a mile away
from the new Christian chapel. Neglected for several years, it had
been gradually disintegrating till the wind threw down the remains of
the ruin.

The Ree Christian Indians are now looking with satisfaction at the
chapel which their own work has helped to build. It is the center of
a new religious and social order. It illustrates, also, the
co-operative work of the Women's Home Missionary Association,
Church-Building Society and the American Missionary Association. All
of these had a helping hand in the building.

It takes all that all can do together to provide new and better
things for the Indian as their hold of and faith in the old pass
away.


[Sidenote: Citizen Indians.]

The Fort Berthold Indians have recently become voters. The
coming fall elections are important; consequently the caucuses held
this spring were of some moment. In the county convention eleven
delegates out of twenty-six were Indians. They might have a deciding
vote of considerable consequence.

There was an effort to control the ignorant part of the community for
private interests. The better educated young men, however, were alive
to their duty and opportunity, and many of the older ones were
sensible enough to put forward the younger and better informed to
represent them. The consequence was that when the delegates arrived
at the county seat they were found to be an intelligent and
well-dressed company, who could understand what was going on. Two of
them went from the county to the Fargo state convention to nominate
delegates to the national presidential convention. One went to the
judicial convention, and two are to go to the coming state convention
at Grand Forks to nominate state officers. Three of these delegates
were from our Santee school, and one from Hampton.

The testimony of political leaders is that the Indian delegates made
a good impression, and were not led into the self-indulgences that
disgraced some whites.

Several years ago one of the older boys found it rather tiresome to
study "civil government" in the mission school. Now he says to his
teacher, "Civil government is all right." It always will be in the
hand of intelligent people who want to do right--all colors
included.

       *       *       *       *       *

"LIGHT AND SHADE."

MRS. IDA V. WOODBURY.


The title of this rambling sketch of Southern travel does not refer,
as might be understood, to the wonderful picturesqueness of the
Southern mountains and valleys, their ever-varying beauty of sunshine
and shadow, nor to the spiritual, moral or intellectual condition of
the people; but is a salutation, embodying in its brevity an
invitation to the stranger to dismount from his horse, or step down
from his carriage, and rest himself beneath the shade of the trees.
"Light, stranger, light and shade," is the laconic, epigrammatic but
cordial and hospitable greeting.

In response to such a salutation, I "lit" from the buggy one
afternoon a few weeks ago in front of a one-roomed, windowless log
hut in the Kentucky mountains, where lived a man, his wife and eight
children. I was urged to "set by," so I went inside the house. The
mother was lying on a bed in the corner, and I said to her, "Are you
sick?" (You must never ask a mountaineer if he is ill, that is
equivalent to asking him if he is cross.) "Yes," she said, "I'm
powerful puny." "Have you been sick long?" was my next question.
"I've been punying around all winter." "Has it been cold here?" "Yes,
mighty cold." "Have you had any snow?" "Yes, we've had a right smart
of snow twicet, and oncet it was pretty nigh shoe-mouth deep."

These people rarely admit that they are well. The most you can expect
is, "I'm tolerable, only jest tolerable," while often they say, "I'm
powerful puny, or nigh about plum sick." And then with an air of
extreme resignation, for they seem to enjoy poor health, they add,
"We're all powerful puny humans."

We had supper on the night of which I write in one of these little
cabins--the young missionary of the American Missionary Association
and myself. The conditions were very primitive, the fare coarse, but
the welcome hearty, the hospitality bountiful. Then we had a
prayer-meeting in the "church house," and between fifty and sixty
people were present. The men dressed in homespun and blue jeans, the
women all with full-bordered cape bonnets and home-knit woolen mitts.
It is a great lack of "form" to go with the hands uncovered, but the
feet are often so; and I will venture to say that the missionary and
myself were the only persons in the "church house" whose mouths were
not filled with tobacco, a custom very much in evidence all through
the meeting.

I talked to them of our work among the Indians, and after the meeting
one man came to me and shook my hand right royally, as he said,
"I've never seen you before, mum, and I reckon I never shall see you
again; but we've been mightily holped up by what you've been saying,
and I reckon we ought to be doing something for them poor humans." In
his poverty, in his need, his heart went out to those who seemed to
him to be in greater destitution.

As we went to our buggy at the close of the meeting, the people
gathered around to say goodbye, and many were the kindly words and
the God-speeds. Many, too, were the evidences of hospitality, and one
insisted that we should go home with him and spend the night. He
said: "It's a mighty long ride to the school, and you'll be a mighty
sight more comfortable to come back and sleep with us." We had called
at his house in the afternoon. There were twelve people--father,
mother and ten children--in a windowless, one-roomed cabin, in which
were three beds ranged side by side. Just what sleeping
accommodations they were going to give us I do not know.

Where were we? Who are these people? Right in the heart of the
Midland Mountains, among our native-born American Highlanders, people
who have had as great a part in forming American history as any like
number of men in our country to-day, people who gave to this nation
Abraham Lincoln, who also produced Jesse James--they are capable of
either--who for a hundred and fifty years have been sitting in the
shade of ignorance, poverty and superstition, but are now coming into
the light of the school and the church as provided for them by the
American Missionary Association.

And now for a moment we will run down into the rice swamps of
Georgia. Come into the house of old Aunt Peggy. A bed and two boxes
form all the furniture of the room. The house is a borrowed one. Aunt
Peggy is having a new one built. It will cost five dollars, and when
we ask her how she is going to pay for it she tells us she has a
quarter saved toward it, and she has promised the man who is building
it her blankets, her only bedding beside an old comforter. But the
weather is growing warm, she says, and "mebbe before it done turn
cold I'll be in the hebbenly mansions." One of the saddest relics of
the old slavery days is these childless, friendless, companionless
old people, childless because slavery separated them from their
children; husbands and wives were parted, and all family life
rendered impossible. Two old people in the region of McIntosh, Ga.,
have recently died, each alone in a little cabin, and the tragedy was
not discovered until the buzzards were seen circling around the
place.

Aunt Peggy's sole comfort and dependence is a little boy eleven or
twelve years old, whom she picked up by the roadside where he, a tiny
baby, had been left by a heartless mother. Although then at least
eighty years old, she strapped him on her back as she went to her
"tasses" (tasks) in the field. She named him Calvary Baker, and now
he has become her dependence and support, although the light in her
shadowed cabin comes from the ministrations of the teachers in
Dorchester Academy; and as she put her old, gaunt, claw-like black
fingers on the face of the delicate, refined academy teacher, Aunt
Peggy said: "Oh, you're my Jesus mudder;" and then, turning to me,
she said, while a smile lit up the old black face, "Oh, missus, I
bress de Lord for the Jesus school, for if it had not been for these
Jesus mudders, I reckon hunger would have carried me off."

It is a wonderful work at McIntosh, as is true of all our schools.
There are great lessons to be learned there. The student of the negro
problem would do well to visit this section of the country with its
historic interest, to note the influence of the old Midway Church,
whose members were obliged to allow their slaves to attend church, so
that at one time the black membership of this church was double the
white; and to learn from a careful statistician that there is a less
per cent. of crime and immorality, and a greater per cent. of
full-blooded negroes here, under the influence of this old religious
_regimé_, than can be found in any like number of our colored
population throughout the Black Belt, save where the Christian school
has changed the life during this last generation.

We are solving the negro problem in the only way possible, in the
opinion of all statesmen, all publicists and all philanthropists, by
the farm and the shop, and the school and the church, and over them
all the Stars and Stripes. But we are doing more than this; we are
setting the solitary in families; the wilderness and the solitary
places are being made glad, and the desert is rejoicing and
blossoming as the rose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY, TENN.


Fisk graduated classes of usual size. It deeply lamented the absence
of President Cravath, who was ill in the East, and the late death of
Prof. Spence. The Dean, J. G. Merrill, was deputed to preside at the
varied functions of commencement week. The weather was unusually
temperate, audiences very large.

The largest college preparatory class in the history of the
university was graduated. It catalogued thirty-nine. Ten States were
represented on its list, and a larger number of young women than have
ever entered Fisk before were made Freshmen.

[Illustration: SENIOR CLASS, FISK UNIVERSITY.]

Commencement week included a missionary sermon, which was delivered
by Prof. Brown, of Vanderbilt University, upon "Paul the
Missionary;" baccalaureate, by the Dean, whose theme was "Moses, the
Leader of his People." To these were added three "graduating
exercises." In the program were over thirty speakers--young men and
women, not one of whom had a syllable of prompting. A graduate of
Princeton University, spending the day in Nashville, after hearing
the four "Commencement" orations, said that each one of them was
superior in thought and delivery to the one that carried off the
prize at Princeton less than ten days before. These young men and
their classmates are to make their careers--three as physicians, two
as pharmacists, two as teachers, one as a business man, the other as
a lawyer. The young woman graduate received two diplomas, the second
being in music, her industry and ability being evidenced in the fact
that her long hours with the piano did not prevent her receiving high
honors in the classroom. One of the men had walked fourteen miles
each day, summer and winter, besides doing the "chores" morning and
night; another has had a chair in a barber shop every evening; others
have taught schools in vacation, been Pullman porters and waiters at
summer resorts. One, whose two grandfathers were Frenchmen, born in
France, before coming to college loaded the rifle and stood by his
father, who shot down three men who came to his home to mob him. He
himself, a very Hercules by name and in appearance, champion on the
college gridiron, pleaded on the commencement stage most persuasively
for "Universal Peace."

Our commencement orator was Rev. H. E. Cobb, one of the pastors in
the Reformed Collegiate Church of New York City. His address upon the
"Open Door" disclosed to the young graduates their possibilities of
success and failure, and captivated old and young.

Fisk enters upon a new year with high hopes. Her Jubilee Singers,
whose music added greatly to the enjoyment of the week, return North
in the late summer to keep alive the enthusiasm awakened by their
last season's successes, while the Faculty know the hour grows nearer
and nearer when the endowment which God has in store for Fisk is to
materialize, and they will know who are God's chosen servants to do
for the Negro what has been so gloriously done for the white young
people of America--furnishing them a chance to secure an education at
an institution throughly equipped to provide the leaders of a tenth
of our population, men and women sound in mind and soul.

The Alumni had an enthusiastic meeting. They were addressed by Miss
Nancy Jones, '86, who has served the A. B. C. F. M. in Africa, and by
Dr. A. A. Wesley, '94, who spoke on "How to Overcome Prejudices,"
who, as surgeon in an Illinois regiment in the Spanish War, won such
distinction as to have been appointed to read a paper before the
National Army Surgeons' Association in New York City the week before
commencement.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT TALLADEGA COLLEGE, ALABAMA.


Coming away one afternoon from one of the exercises of commencement
week at Talladega College, a prominent white citizen said in comment
on a speech he had just heard: "There is a good deal of foolish talk
about how much the Spanish-American war has done in bringing the
North and South together; but the fact is, that schools like this, in
which the Negro is taught to be law-abiding and to live a moral life,
administered as this one is with such good sense and wisdom, are
doing far more than any sentimental influences of the war to bring
races and sections to mutual good understanding." On Sunday, at the
big Chautauqua building, during the baccalaureate sermon, two white
citizens were standing at the door watching the quiet, orderly
audience of perhaps fifteen hundred colored people. One of them has
not been distinguished for earnestness of desire to see the Negro
educated. Said the other, "It looks like the niggers are coming up in
spite of h--," to which the response, though possibly reluctant, was
clearly affirmative.

Those who have been toiling all the year long, unable to appreciate
the work in its perspective, discouraged sometimes because results
hoped for do not immediately appear, are cheered by such testimony to
the efficiency and value of the work, even if it is not always given
in elegant and reverent form. And there was other testimony of the
same kind from all sorts and conditions of visitors. Expressions of
pleasure and approval came constantly from alumni, from teachers in
other schools, from citizens both white and black.

Not as large a graduating class was sent out as usual, there being
only nine in all--three young men from the college department, and
six from the normal school, all young women but one. The parents of
none of these students have graduated from Talladega. All of them
were slaves, though most were so young at the time of emancipation as
not to remember much of slavery days. The father of one of the
college men, however, was, it is said, made by his master to run
regularly before the bloodhounds to keep them in training. Sometimes
it was hard running, and sometimes he had to take refuge in a tree to
escape harm when the dogs had caught up with him. This young man, who
carried off the A.B. degree, is planning to go to Yale for further
study, and after a year or two to enter a Northern law-school.

Another of the same department is in some ways an accomplished
fellow. He has read widely and remembers what he has read; he plays
the violin; he is an excellent pianist, and he is a member of the
college male quartet, which is to spend the summer in the North,
endeavoring to raise money for new buildings greatly needed at
Talladega. After this summer campaign he also hopes to begin the
study of law at Columbia or Harvard. The third young man of the
college class expects to take for a year a principalship in the
public schools of a neighboring city, and then enter upon the study
of medicine.

The young man who finished the normal course, being a good carpenter,
has been for three years head of the college repair shop. For this
summer he will return to a country school where he has taught for
five consecutive summers, and in the fall hopes to enter a
trade-school to perfect himself in carpentry and to learn what he can
of architecture and building, purposing to devote himself to that
line of work.

It is a matter of congratulation to the school that so many
students, after finishing some course here, are ambitious to pursue
their studies further in the best institutions of the country.

The young women who were graduated from the normal course are all to
enter upon the work for which they have been trained, one or two
already having positions in view in city schools, while the others
will take up work in the country districts. It is not a large class,
as has been said, but it is a good, earnest, ambitious class, in
which there is large promise of solid usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, LA.


The exercises of commencement week began on the morning of Sunday,
May 20th, with an interesting address to the Christian associations
by Rev. A. S. Jackson, D.D., of Dallas, Texas.

On the evening of the same day President Oscar Atwood delivered the
Baccalaureate Address. The close attention which this address
commanded showed how well chosen was its theme and interesting the
presentation of its ideas.

On Monday the Industrial and Grade work was exhibited. Specimens of
practical work in wood done by the young men and boys in the shop,
articles both useful and beautiful from the sewing-room, together
with fine drawings and written exercises done by members of the
different grades, made up this exhibit.

The value of this branch of the university's work cannot be
overestimated. The training given is of the most practical kind.
Young men have been enabled, through the industrial education
received at the university, to work at the carpenter's trade during
their summer vacation, and thus earn the means necessary to take them
through the following year of study. At the present time one
enterprising young graduate, as a result of this very training, is
putting up with his own hands the building which is to shelter the
school he is founding in Southern Louisiana.

In the sewing-room the young women and girls, besides acquiring a
knowledge of mending and darning, learn to cut, fit and make all
kinds of garments. Fancy work is taught them after they have learned
the more useful kinds of sewing.

Monday afternoon the Rev. Chas. R. Dinkins addressed the literary
societies of the university, and on Monday evening one of the most
interesting programs of the whole commencement season was
presented--namely, the class-day program.

It was in these exercises that the love of the graduating classes for
their Alma Mater, and their appreciation of her faithful and
efficient instruction found fullest expression. We have known of
schools where class-day was made an occasion for ridiculing the
Faculty, students and instruction of the institution. Not so at
Straight; class-day there is one of the occasions when the delightful
relations that have existed between teachers and students, and among
the student body, are revealed.

[Illustration: COLLEGE DEPARTMENT GRADUATING CLASS WITH PRESIDENT,
STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.]

A short address by the President is followed by the class oration,
well composed and ably delivered. Then we listen to an entertaining
paper which gives us the history of the class. We review with the
young historian its hardships and its triumphs, and conclude that,
like all other classes whose history we have heard, it has had a
remarkable career. The prophecy is a spicy bit of humor, and reflects
much credit upon its writer, a dainty little miss, as bright and
interesting a prophet as we shall meet in many a long day. A young
man now steps forward upon the platform, of whose purpose in so doing
we are not quite sure. The president of the class soon clears up our
doubts, however, by requesting President Atwood to come forward. It
is evident that this is a surprise to the head of the university. The
young man makes a short speech of presentation and hands to the
president a gift from the graduating classes. The singing of the
class ode closes this part of the evening's exercises, and the
college class now presents an excellent program consisting of an
oration by the president, a history and a well-written poem.

One cannot help remarking upon the dignity and good taste which
characterized the exercises of Class-Day. We doubt whether any class
in a Northern school could have made a better showing.

[Illustration: COLLEGE PREPARATORY AND NORMAL GRADUATING CLASS,
STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.]

On Tuesday afternoon the graduating exercises of the grammar
department were held. On Wednesday evening, when the graduating
classes received their diplomas, the other students received
certificates of the work they had done.

The alumni of Straight held their annual business meeting on Tuesday
evening.

The commencement exercises on Wednesday evening formed a fitting
climax for a week so full of interest and inspiration. These
exercises are held at Central Church because it can accommodate a
much larger audience than the university chapel, and in the evening,
because this hour permits many to be present who, on account of their
work, could not attend commencement during the day.

Long before the hour appointed for beginning the exercises, all the
seats were filled and all the standing room in the church utilized,
and the air was alive with whispers, low tones and the flutter of
fans as the audience waited, with the best patience it could muster,
for the opening numbers of the program. When President Atwood rose
and announced the first number, all sounds ceased, and the great
audience gave close attention to that and all the twenty-one
succeeding numbers on the program.

The program was one of which the university may be justly proud. The
orations of the graduates from the college course on "The Mission of
the Scholar," "Aims and Ideals," and "Does the Constitution Follow
the Flag?" would have been considered exceptional in any of our
Northern colleges, for their thought, expression and delivery. The
three graduates from the theological department did credit to their
teacher, Rev. G. W. Henderson, D.D., in their contribution to the
program, and the sixteen students who were graduated from the normal
and college preparatory courses likewise acquitted themselves with
credit. The music of the program was furnished by the students, and
consisted of piano solos and duets and choruses. The performers
deserve much commendation. The presentation of diplomas formed an
impressive close to the evening's program.

To have seen these students is to believe in the work which the
American Missionary Association is doing in the South, and to become
a promoter of that work; it is to have faith in the ability of the
negro to become a useful citizen; it is to catch a glimpse of the
true solution of the negro problem, and to see that the satisfactory
solution of that great question is being worked out, not by our
legislators, but by devoted Christian men and women, like President
Atwood and his corps of teachers, who are giving the best years of
their lives to the service of the Master in the Southland.

The graduating class is the largest in the history of the university,
thirteen young men and twelve young women. Ten of these reside in New
Orleans, and twelve are from different parts of Louisiana, North
Carolina and Texas. Seven completed the college preparatory course,
nine the normal, three the course in arts and three the theological.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.


Commencement at Tougaloo University this year was characterized by an
unusual quietness and the absence of the great crowds which usually
attend. For many weeks smallpox had been prevalent in the regions
about, so much so, that it was necessary to practically quarantine
the school against incomers. Since February, nearly all pupils had
been refused in the boarding department, and from the middle of March
the day pupils had been excluded almost wholly. It is worthy of
note, however, that notwithstanding this, the enrollment of the year
surpassed, by one hundred and more, that of the year previous. It did
not seem wise to issue any general invitation to the Commencement
Exercises, and so the public stayed away. A few invited guests came
from Jackson, among them Governor Longino, Secretary of State Power,
ex-Congressman Hooker, and some of the pastors of the city. These
gentlemen made brief addresses, heartily commending the school's work
and that for which it stands. The annual address on "Wealth," by Dr.
Cornelius H. Patton, of St. Louis, made a very deep impression.

Four students were graduated from the academy and normal course. Two
of them, and possibly more, will take college work. Next year
Tougaloo will, for the first time, have a full college course.
Excellent work has been done in that department during the past year.
It is interesting to note that one of the graduates represents the
second generation at Tougaloo, her mother having been a student in
the early days of the school. There are many such second generation
students in the lower grades, and they distinctly show the effects of
the influences to which their parents were subjected. All the
graduates were country-bred.

Those visitors to the school who had been familiar with it in the
past years were specially interested in the outward changes visible.
The new Beard Hall, commodious and pleasant, well furnished and
convenient, and the new Refectory, with its dining-room capable of
seating three hundred students; the Emergency Building, now
transformed into a spacious building for the manual training in wood
and industrial drawing; the new building for iron and steel forging
and masonry; the old shop metamorphosed into a most satisfactory
laundry, all were commented on as great additions to the material
side of Tougaloo's life. In passing from building to building,
attention was paid to the industrial features of the work. The
exhibits of iron and steel tools made by the students, among them a
machine for cutting iron, of great strength and excellent
workmanship; of chairs, desks, tables, tabourets, etc.; of needlework
from the beginning steps to completed garments; of cookery and of
millinery, were deemed very satisfactory. Much of the work cannot be
surpassed anywhere. Leading Mississippians are proud of Tougaloo and
its work, and esteem it the best school of its class.

Mention was more than once made of the fact that the new president of
Alcorn College, the state institution for colored young men, which is
now doing better work than for some years, and his accomplished wife,
are graduates of Tougaloo. The teacher of iron and steel work there
had his training in the Tougaloo shops.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT GRANDVIEW INSTITUTE, TENN.


The exercises of the Fifteenth Annual Commencement of the Grandview
Normal Institute opened with the baccalaureate sermon by the
principal, Sunday, April 29th, in the chapel.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday were occupied with examinations in all
the grades and departments, which afforded abundant evidence of a
year of faithful and fruitful work.

On Thursday evening, May 3d, the public commencement was held in the
assembly room of the school building, and was attended by a very
large audience. The graduates were only three in number, two young
women and one young man.

Two of the graduates were genuine American Highlanders, and were
residents of Grandview, the third came from Sequatchie Valley.

The orations and essays were without exception creditable
performances.

One pleasing feature of the evening was the presentation by Rev. W.
E. Rogers, County Superintendent, of State diplomas to twenty
juniors.

The perfect order which prevailed throughout the exercises was in
striking contrast to former days when pistols and "moonshine" whiskey
were most fearfully in evidence.

Of the graduates, one of the young women will teach school the coming
year, the young man will seek work somewhere for a year and hopes
then to enter the State University at Knoxville and so fit himself
for some useful calling in life. These graduates are earnest young
Christians who will go out from their alma mater to reflect credit on
the School and to do honor to those who have generously given of
their means that the children of the people stranded on these
mountains may "see a great light." The year just closed was the most
prosperous one in the history of Grandview school. The enrollment was
the largest the school had ever known and was considerably above two
hundred.

Next year, if the juniors all return, as is expected, the graduating
class will number about twenty.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT PLEASANT HILL ACADEMY, TENN.


The graduating class of Pleasant Hill Academy numbered six--three
girls and three boys--most of the number coming from the Highland Rim
instead of from the mountains proper. There were four others in the
class, one from Alabama, but ill-health and other causes reduced the
number to six.

Two or three will continue their work at the University of Tennessee,
one at the University of Missouri, one at Peabody Normal, Nashville.
All expect to teach, and one expects eventually to become a trained
nurse and missionary.

We have been interested in tracing their ancestry, which follows: one
English, one Scotch-Irish, one Irish, one Scotch-Irish and Dutch, one
English-Irish, one Scotch-Irish and French. In the class are
Cumberland Presbyterian, Methodist South, Free Baptist, one Mormon
and one of Unitarian preferences.

One of the women is the wife of a blind preacher who is doing a good
work in this region.

Notwithstanding denominational preferences there has been unity of
feeling and co-operation in Christian work. We feel from expression
given that these young people will use their education for the
betterment of those who look to them for leadership.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORT BERTHOLD INDIAN SCHOOL, N. D.


[Illustration: CHILDREN'S COTTAGE AND CHAPEL, FT. BERTHOLD, N. D.]

This school, as a whole, consists of a mixture of the three Indian
tribes, the Mandan, Ree and Gros Ventre. The pupils come from homes
scattered along either side of the Missouri River from Elbowoods to
Berthold, a stretch of some twenty miles.

[Illustration: GROUP OF PUPILS, FT. BERTHOLD, N. D.]

When one becomes acquainted with the children after they have been at
the school a year or two and considers the homes from which some of
them come, he is almost inclined to wonder at the transforming power
of Christian education. Most of these Indians have graduated from the
old-time tepee. Their houses to-day are of logs plastered with mud.
Sometimes they consist of one room, but frequently have two or three
rooms. A three-roomed cottage usually consists of a central room with
one outside door, and a room at each end connecting with the central
room, but having no outside door. The roof is made of rafters, upon
which poles are laid crosswise, and the whole covered several inches
with earth. The floor is sometimes of lumber, but more generally of
bare earth, which in very wet weather is apt to be turned into mud by
the rain that drips through the ground-covered roof. In the larger
houses two or three families often live, sometimes with two or three
grandmothers or grandfathers, or both.

The food being issued by the Government to them, each one has the
same quantity and quality. They generally all eat together, the
older ones sitting upon the floor, while the younger and more
civilized eat from a table. Their dishes frequently correspond in
quantity and quality with their advancement in civilization.

In the work of the school the principal writes: "As far as possible I
intend to have the pupils 'know, and know that they know,' what they
have gone over. I find that many of them seem to appreciate this
careful and accurate knowledge. They may not make as good a showing
in a report, but the purpose of the school is to work for the
children and not for public recognition."

       *       *       *       *       *

A TRIBUTE TO REV. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D.

SECRETARY C. C. CREEGAN.


I first became acquainted with Dr. Behrends when he was in Cleveland,
and had a profound respect for him as a man, as well as one of the
ablest preachers of our time. When I came to Brooklyn several years
ago I was led to unite with his church. I can therefore speak from a
personal knowledge of twenty-five years.

In the death of Dr. Behrends, who had served both as vice-president
and member of the Executive Committee of the American Missionary
Association, the Society, as well as the denomination of which he was
one of the most conspicuous members, has suffered a great loss.
Central Church, Brooklyn, where he ministered with distinguished
success for seventeen years and where he was beloved by all, will
feel the loss of this great and good man most keenly, but all the
churches of his home city, where his voice was often heard and where
his influence was so great, will mourn the departure of one of the
greatest preachers of this generation.

Born in Holland, in the home of an humble Lutheran preacher, he came
to this country with his parents when five years of age. While
teaching school in his seventeenth year, near Portsmouth, Ohio, he
was converted by the preaching of an obscure Methodist minister and
at once decided to fit himself for the work of the ministry. Largely
by his own efforts he worked his way through Dennison University,
Ohio, graduating in 1862 in a class of three, all of whom became
prominent clergymen. Three years later he completed his theological
studies at Rochester Theological Seminary at the head of his class
and was called at once to the pastorate of a large Baptist Church in
Yonkers, N. Y., where he remained eight years. He was then called to
the First Baptist Church of Cleveland, Ohio, where he won great
distinction as a platform orator.

It was during this pastorate, which lasted only three years, that Dr.
Behrends, after a great struggle, decided to resign from this strong
church, where he was very popular, and enter another denomination.
Six happy years were then spent in the Union Church of Providence,
where he was recognized as one of the foremost preachers in the State
and nation.

Dr. Behrends was a great scholar. It is the belief of those who knew
him well that he was able to fill any chair in any of our theological
seminaries. His services were in frequent demand for courses of
lectures in our leading colleges and seminaries, and at least two of
these courses have been put into book form.

While his services were often sought for on great occasions, such as
the annual meetings of the A. M. A. and A. B. C. F. M., and similar
gatherings, his best work was done in his own pulpit. His sermons
were always prepared with the greatest care, and, except on rare
occasions, were delivered without a note and with wonderful beauty of
diction and irresistible logic to the audiences of two thousand
cultured people who hung on his words every Sabbath and who regarded
him, not without good reason, "the greatest preacher in America."

The secret of the great success of Dr. Behrends as a preacher was not
to be found in his striking personality, nor in his musical voice,
nor his profound scholarship, but rather in his strong faith in the
Bible as the Word of God, as his only creed, and that Christ Jesus,
the divine Saviour, is to win the whole world to Himself. From this
belief he never wavered, and to him the preaching of the gospel to
men and seeing them come into the kingdom was the joy of his soul.

       *       *       *       *       *

RICHARD SALTER STORRS.

CHARLES A. HULL, CHAIRMAN.


I shall not attempt to repeat what has been so fully said by the
religious and secular journals of the country in reference to the
life and work of this great and good man, but I desire to say a few
words in regard to his connection with the anti-slavery movement, and
his interest in the work of the American Missionary Association. He
was an original Abolitionist, and one of the most pronounced even in
the early years of the agitation in his opposition to the wickedness
of slavery, and in later years the cause of the elevation of the
freedman had no stronger nor better friend than he.

In an article written for the Fiftieth Anniversary Number of _The
Independent_, of which he was one of the original editors, speaking
of the conditions at the time _The Independent_ was founded, and the
attitude of some of the societies toward slavery, Dr. Storrs added:
"And repeated efforts to induce the American Board of Foreign
Missions to take decisive anti-slavery ground, while carrying on its
work among Cherokees and Choctaws and other slaveholding peoples,
wholly failed of success--out of which failure came, however, the
American Missionary Association, since so justly honored, and so
widely and nobly useful."

By spoken and by written word he contributed much to the cause of
Christian education in the South and among the so-called dependent
races.

About ten years ago he preached a special sermon upon "Our Nation's
Work for the Colored People," in which, speaking of the work of the
Association, he said: "Now I affirm absolutely that if there ever was
a work of God on earth, this is His work! If there was ever anything
to which the American Christian people were called, they are called
to this. If there was ever a great opportunity before the Christian
Church, here it is; not to reach those people merely for their own
immediate welfare; not to save our own national life merely; but to
Christianize that immense continent which lies opposite to us on the
map, which we have wronged so long with the slave-trade and with rum,
and to which now we can, if we will, send multitudes of messengers to
testify of the glory of the grace of God."

I wish in closing to say a few words of Dr. Storrs as a friend.
Through many years he was not only my pastor but the most honored and
beloved friend of my life. His sense of humor was keen, and his
playfulness of manner constituted not the least of his charms to
those who knew him intimately. He never seemed to take a narrow view
of any subject, but was always lenient to and tolerant of those whose
opinions differed from his own, and yet strong and vigorous in his
own convictions. His loss to those closely associated with him in
personal and Church relations is one which can never be filled. He
was extremely modest in his estimate of himself and his efforts, and
simple-minded to a wonderful degree for a man of such supreme power
and influence. He never shirked what appeared to him a duty, and one
of the pleasantest recollections of my life is of a journey made by
him, at considerable personal inconvenience, only about a year ago,
to visit a former parishioner who had not seen him for years, and who
in his old age and feebleness desired to talk with him. His visit
brought sunshine and mental and spiritual comfort, and will ever be
gratefully remembered by those to whom he ministered.

In grandeur of thought, in nobility of utterance, and in his
wonderful personality, he was unique, and his death has left in the
American pulpit a void which we cannot expect to see filled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Obituary.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROFESSOR A. K. SPENCE.


Rev. Adam K. Spence, for twenty-five years a professor in Fisk
University, died in Nashville, Tenn., April 24, 1900. He was born in
Aberdeenshire, Scotland, in 1831. His parents removed to this country
in his early childhood. He studied in Oberlin and Ann Arbor,
graduating at the last named institution, where he taught for a time
after graduation.

In 1870 he was appointed by the American Missionary Association as
the principal of the school which afterward became Fisk University.
Since then scores of young people have gone forth each year from this
institution bearing the signate of Christian culture, and their
widespread influence is telling upon the South. Prof. Spence laid the
foundations of the Greek department in this university.

His love for music and appreciation of its finest effects amounted
almost to a passion. He helped give the university a high standard of
music, which has rendered it unique in Southern schools. Especially
was he an advocate of jubilee music, and did much to gather these
songs of quaint power and value into the archives of the university.
His great interest was in the spiritual development of the students.
Many revivals, resulting in the conversion of large numbers, were
greatly promoted by his prayer and earnest efforts. Prof. Spence was
always present at the prayer meeting when it was possible for him to
attend, and his influence was profoundly felt.

At the funeral, when the people passed to take a last look at the
familiar face, old men and women who had known him as their friend
during all these years, students and little children gazed lovingly
upon him. A large body of students went directly from Jubilee Hall to
Mount Olivet, where his body was laid to rest.

  H. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.


The death of Dr. Alexander removes one who, in other years, occupied
an important position in the mission service of this Association. Dr.
Alexander was president of Straight University during a difficult and
important period. He made his impression upon the institution,
developing the work internally both intensively and extensively. He
was an earnest student and encouraged scholarship among the students.
His large influence was felt among the churches of lower Louisiana.
He became something of a bishop in the Congregational work in that
state. His judgment was wise and wholesome and his counsel always
helpful. His name is held in esteem, almost in reverence, by many of
the colored people of that region even to this day.

Dr. Alexander was born in East Killingly, Conn., August 29, 1835. He
was a graduate of Yale College and Andover Theological Seminary. He
held important pastorates in Connecticut and Wisconsin prior to the
war. He served under the Christian Commission with the Army of the
Potomac. He went abroad in 1872 and took charge of twelve free
churches in Italy. Returning from that country, he accomplished
fruitful missionary service in the South. In 1886, he became pastor
of the North Avenue Congregational Church, in Cambridge, Mass., and
served in this capacity until 1890. Since retiring from active
pastoral duties he has ministered to churches in various cities, most
acceptably to the people and with fruitful results.

       *       *       *       *       *

PORTO RICO NOTES.

CHARLES B. SCOTT, SANTURCE, PORTO RICO.


[Sidenote: Educational Notes.]

Of the 950,000 inhabitants of Porto Rico, only about 100,000 can read
or write; 85 per cent. of the adult population are illiterate. Of the
200,000 children from five to sixteen years of age, all the schools,
public and private, can accommodate about thirty thousand. The
average daily attendance in all the schools of the island during the
past year has been not more than twenty to twenty-five thousand.

The school population (five to sixteen years of age) of San Juan is
about 6,000. The total seating capacity of all schools in the
capital, public and private, is not more than fifteen hundred.

There have been during the past year in the public schools of San
Juan nine or ten American teachers; forty more American teachers are
scattered through the public schools of the island. About twenty are
gentlemen acting as supervisors of districts and superintendents of
city schools.


[Sidenote: Christian Schools.]

The American Missionary Association of the Congregational Churches
has had during the past school year seven American teachers in Porto
Rico, divided between Santurce, a suburb of San Juan, and Lares. The
Presbyterians have had four American missionary teachers at Mayaguez.
The Baptist Church has two American ladies devoting part of their
time to teaching. The Christian Church has a school at San Juan, with
three teachers from the states.

Porto Rico is divided for educational purposes into fifteen
districts, each with an American supervisor in charge of from thirty
to forty schools. These gentlemen must ride hundreds of miles,
largely on native ponies, over poor roads and poorer mountain trails,
inspecting the schools and helping, directing and often stirring up
the native teachers.

The schools of the American Missionary Association have enrolled over
three hundred children. At Lares the pupils have been very regular in
attendance. In Santurce the attendance has been somewhat irregular.
In both schools the subjects pursued in American schools in the first
five grades have been taken up, with much attention to English. The
fact that very few children knew any English, and that most of the
teachers knew very little Spanish, made the work trying and slow at
first. The children proved themselves about as bright as American
children, quick in their perceptions, with good memories, weak in
arithmetic, not good thinkers or reasoners.

Rarely do American teachers in the States receive so many little
tokens of esteem and appreciation. On the other hand, the pupils are
quick-tempered, with little power of self control; rather easily
offended, and lack in perseverance and stability. They have little
idea of attention and little power to study. They are anxious to come
to school, and will sacrifice much to get clothes and pay tuition. On
the other hand, they will often stay at home for trivial reasons,
having no idea of the need of regular attendance. They always come to
school well dressed and usually clean; they will not come barefooted,
ragged or dirty. The children of the poorer classes roam the streets,
before and after school, barefooted and ragged, saving their clothes
and shoes for school.

The Christian schools, such as those of the American Missionary
Association, do not exist merely to supplement the public schools.
From the conditions in Porto Rico the public schools must be entirely
and utterly non-religious. Not even religious songs or the Lord's
Prayer are allowed. Any teacher discovered teaching any phase of
religion forfeits his or her salary for that month.


[Sidenote: Bible Study.]

In the Christian schools, while the carefully-selected American
teachers insure good schools and good teaching of the ordinary
branches, there is a place for moral education, for simple religious
exercises and for Bible study.


[Sidenote: Rural Education.]

The great problem in Porto Rico will be rural education. Probably
800,000 of its 950,000 people live in the country or in hamlets. The
cities are already providing for teachers' training-schools. The
field of greatest usefulness for the A. M. A. lies in giving the
young men and women a fair education under Christian influences, and
sending them out into the country and village schools.

The people of Lares are deeply interested in the school and willing
to help the work; the location is as healthful as any in the island,
and Lares, as a great coffee center, promises to thrive and grow.

The education most needed in Porto Rico is practical, industrial
education. Santurce, near the capital, with a large, poor population
about the school, dependent on their daily work for their support,
furnishes an excellent location for an industrial school. The people
and children do not know how to do anything. The women are
"lavenderas," or washwomen, the children carry water, the men do odd
jobs, and all are poorly housed, poorly clothed, poorly fed. The
children need manual training, and gardening for the boys and sewing
and cooking for the girls. Next year it is proposed to start these
lines of work at Santurce. Head and hand and heart can be reached and
trained for a better and more useful Christian life.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOSS OF SUPPLIES FOR ALASKA.


Our missionaries at Cape Prince of Wales, Mr. and Mrs. Lopp, sent us
in the spring their request for supplies of provisions and other
necessities for the coming year. This request was immediately
fulfilled by purchases in San Francisco, and the supplies were duly
sent out in the bark "Alaska."

We have received intelligence from Dr. Jackson, at Nome, that the
bark "Alaska" was driven ashore and wrecked in the surf on Wednesday,
June 6th. In this letter Dr. Jackson mentions that the wrecked ship
contained a cabinet organ for the Prince of Wales mission, which was
ruined, and that the ship also brought up a turkey from San Francisco
for Mr. Lopp's Thanksgiving dinner.

The next day Dr. Jackson wrote us a brief note, saying: "The bark
Alaska that went ashore on Wednesday went to pieces in the storm
yesterday, and the supplies for the station at Cape Prince of Wales
are a total loss, even to the Thanksgiving turkey, which was
drowned." He added that he hoped to meet Mr. Lopp sometime next week.

The destruction of these supplies renders it necessary to send others
at once. The faithful missionaries at this important station must not
suffer. The friends of our Alaska mission who have so generously
contributed to its support will not forget this additional financial
necessity coming in this strange and unexpected calamity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Department of Christian Endeavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

STATE AND CITY ORGANIZATION.

BY SECRETARY J. E. ROY.


The Association Building (Y. M. C. A.), in Chicago, furnishes offices
for several of the National Missionary Societies, among them the
American Missionary Association. In addition to these we have the
depository and reception-room of the United Society of Christian
Endeavor, which is also used as the headquarters of the Illinois and
Chicago Union. Here the state board holds its weekly session. Here is
kept the supply of Christian Endeavor literature for the varied needs
of the Christian Endeavor workers, helps for missionary and
temperance and good citizenship meetings, with an array of programs.
Among all Endeavorers, as among all missionary society workers, the
hunger for programs is great indeed. Blessed be the man or woman who
has the genius for preparing such stimulating outlines of study.

In this city there are two hundred and fifty Christian Endeavor
Societies. In fifteen societies in the South Division of the city the
sum of $791.28 has been given to missionary work since January 1st,
of which $588.43 went to foreign missions, $61.54 to home missions
and $141.40 to city missions.

[Illustration: HEADQUARTERS Y. P. S. C. E. UNION, CHICAGO, ILL.]

Nine societies of Evanston in the last year have given $688.55 to
missions--$255 to foreign, $59 to home and $374 to city missions. All
have given something to the famine sufferers in India. Some of the
societies visit hospitals and take flowers to the sick; one society
visits a crippled lady once a week and holds a little prayer-meeting
with her. The First Congregational Society has given $290 to the
Chicago Commons.

A member of one Chicago society, a business man who is a great
Christian Endeavor worker, has a library of over sixty volumes on
missionary subjects which he is loaning all the time. Our Pilgrim
Church has a society which publishes its own paper, _The Pilgrim's
Progress_, that serves all the purposes of the church in its several
departments.


[Sidenote: The Chicago Chinese Endeavor.]

The Chinese school in Dr. Goodwin's church, the First, has its
Christian Endeavor Society. It is conducted mainly by the Chinese in
their native language. They sing our gospel songs in Chinese and are
earnest in the study of the Bible, pursuing the customary order of
worship and of work. The school was started in 1884, with 32 pupils
and 20 teachers. The number soon came up to 80. Then, as other
schools were started, this number was diminished, but from the first
the work has been a success. In 1897, a Monday night school was
started and it is flourishing yet. As many as forty from this school
have publicly professed Christ. Four united with the church in the
last year. Four have been for several years in missionary work in
China, one of them, Chan Sui Chung, as assistant of Rev. Dr. C. R.
Hager, M.D., has charge of a chapel in the village of Hoi Yin, and
Dr. Hager reports him quite helpful in preparing native evangelists,
and says that God has greatly blessed his labors. Chan Sui Chung had
over fifty baptisms in his mission in 1899. They soon catch the
benevolent spirit of the Gospel. Last year the members of this school
gave $50 for mission work in California, $60 for aid in building a
house of worship near their families in China, and one of them, from
his own earnings, gave $500 for mission work in his own land.

Rev. J. A. Mack, who has been for many years secretary of the Chicago
Bible Society, and who is the volunteer superintendent of this
Sunday-school, is just now out in our _Times-Herald_ with an article
from which I get these statistics. He also says there are some 2,000
Chinese in this city and for them ten Chinese mission schools--the
number of pupils depending upon the number of Chicago Christians who
are ready to teach them.


[Sidenote: A Live Endeavor Church.]

[Illustration: SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, OAK PARK, ILL.]

It is the Second Congregational Church of Oak Park, Dr. Sydney
Strong, pastor. Its Christian Endeavor Society, besides paying $25 a
year for the support of a young lady student in Dakota, and a like
amount for a young girl student in a colored school at the South, has
subscribed and is now paying the sum of $500 toward the erection of
their magnificent meeting-house, which was dedicated only this last
spring. A class in the Sunday-school of that church also subscribed a
thousand dollars toward their church edifice and is paying it
promptly. The capacity of this building was tested during the
meetings of the General Association of Illinois, and it was found
capable of seating a thousand people in its auditorium, and of
feeding six hundred people at the first tables in its dining room on
occasion of the banquet given by the City Congregational Club to the
members of the General Association of the state. That club had made
the American Missionary Association its guest along with the General
Association, and so brought upon its platform as speakers, Secretary
C. J. Ryder, D.D., Mrs. I. V. Woodbury, of Boston, Field Missionary
Rev. G. W. Moore, and Rev. Mary C. Collins of the Dakota Mission. The
Jubilee Singers discoursed their delicious music through that
session, as also through those of the state body, and filled our city
and its surroundings with the sincerest praise of their spiritually
elevating service in song. The exploiting of the American Missionary
Association thus by the club was a spontaneous and immensely hearty
commendation of its mission and its work.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for April                                      $1,350.00
  Previously acknowledged                               31,116.73
                                                       ----------
                                                       $32,466.73
                                                       ==========

NOTE.--Where no name follows that of the town, the contribution is
from the church and society of that place. Where a name follows, it
is that of the contributing church or individual. S. means
Sunday-school; C. means Church; C. E., the Young People's Society of
Christian Endeavor; S. A. means Student Aid.


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $780.22--of which from Estate, $500.00.

Alfred, 5. Auburn, High St., C., bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville,
Ga._ Blue Hill, F. A. Fisher, _for Mountain White Work_, 10. Blue
Hill, C. J. Lord, Pkg., _for Sewing Class, Andersonville, Ga._
Brewer, First, 10.75. Cape Elizabeth, South, C. E., 1. Denmark, S.,
_for Tougaloo U._, 6. Gorham, 50. Hiram, 2.45. Kennebunk, Union,
45.46. Lebanon, 8.62. Lewiston, Pine St., 21. Lewiston, Pine St., C.
E., 8; Miss S. Lizzie Weymouth, 2.50, _for S. A., B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._ Mechanics Falls, C., Prim. S. Class, _for S. A.,
Andersonville, Ga._, 1. Portland, Williston, 60.49; J. Henry Dow, 5.
Rockland, Y. P. S. of C., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 5. Sebago, 55
cts. Turner, Rev. C. H. Wilder's S. Class, _for S. A., Dorchester
Acad., Ga._, 1. Turner, Harold Dinsmore, _for S. A., B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._, 40 cts. Waterford, C., _for S. A., Dorchester
Acad., Ga._, 13. Woodfords, Miss Jennie Lucas, _for S. A., Skyland
Inst., N. C._, 10. Woodfords, Helen J. Foster's S. Class, _for
Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 50 cents. Yarmouthville, C. E., _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 12.50.

ESTATE.--Portland, Estate of Mrs. Sarah D. How, by Dr. Charles A.
Ring, Exec'r, 500.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $359.11.

Acworth, C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 7. Alstead Center, C.,
Ladies' Circle, _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1.20. Candia, 5. Candia, C.,
L. B. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Claremont, C.,
Women's Bible Class, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 4. Concord, S., _for
Tougaloo U._, 35. Durham, 17.27. Exeter, Phillips (50 of which _for
Porto Rico_), 178.08. Exeter, First, 47.88. Hudson, by Miss E. A.
Warner, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Laconia, C., Ladies' Soc., _for
Saluda, N. C._, 1.70. Lee, Y. M. M. C., 5. Orford, 5. Orfordville, 2.
Pittsfield, C. E., 10. Swansea, L. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ Troy, Trin., 9.30. Warner, S., Lincoln Mem., 2. West Concord,
Granite Mission Band, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 10. Wolfboro, First,
10.68.


VERMONT, $1,419.42--of which from Estate, $1,319.04.

Dorset, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10. Hartford, 15.
Jeffersonville, Benj. Nye, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Middlebury, 23.
Quechee, 17. South Hero, "A Friend," 5. Pittsford, S., _for Porto
Rico_, 2.28. Randolph Center, 10.10. Saxtons River, 6. Weston, Mrs.
C. W. Sprague, 2. West Rutland, Miss C. M. Gorham, 2 _for Mountain
White Work_, 1 _for Indian M._, 1 _for Chinese M._, 30 cts. _for
Porto Rico_, 50c. _for C. P._

ESTATE.--Estate of Frederick Parks, 1,320.94 (less expense, 1.50),
1,319.04.


MASSACHUSETTS, $4,968.46--of which from Estates, $516.80.

Amherst, Second, Primary Dept., _for S. A., Straight U._, 6.65.
Andover, Christian Workers, _for Macon, Ga._, 5. Ashfield, 27.51.
Ashfield, C., bbl. Goods, _for Charleston, S. C._ Ashland, 5.
Auburndale, L. B. S., bbl. Goods, _for Nat. Ala._ Ballardvale, Union,
55.54. Belchertown, 25. Beverly, Dane St., C. E., _for S. A., Saluda,
N. C._, 3.

Boston, Central, 289.18; Walnut Ave., 93.05. Boston, J. A. Lane,
_for Shrubbery, Enfield, N. C._, 5. Campello, South, S., 12.75.
Dorchester, Second, 123.35; "E. C. C.," 5. Dorchester, Second, Extra
Cent-a-Day, _for Porto Rico_, 10. Jamaica Plain, Boylston, 80.48.
Roxbury, Highland, 20.06.

Braintree, First, 5.64. Brockton, Olivet C., M. Soc., _for
Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Brockton, C. E., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1.
Brookfield, 15.85. Brookline, Harvard, 89.84. Cambridge, First and
Shepard Soc., 604.61; North Ave. C., 100.50. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim,
88.37. Chicopee Falls, Second, 28.98. Curtissville, S., Lincoln Mem.,
5.50. Essex, 30. Fall River, Central, 5. Florence, C. E., _for S. A.,
Tougaloo, U._, 20. Florence, 10.01. Freetown, Mrs. L. C. Deane, _for
Fisk U._, 20. Georgetown, Memorial, 10.03. Great Barrington, Mrs. J.
P. Pomery, Quilts and Towels, Mrs. Flora Atwood, 5, _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Greenfield, The Misses Mann, _for Wilmington:
N. C._, 12. Hanson, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 3. Haverhill, "A
Friend," _for Mountain White Work_, 500. Hawley, First, 4.07.
Holbrook, J. V. Thayer, bbl. Goods; Winthrop, L. B. S., bbl. Goods,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Indian Orchard, L. B. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Ipswich, So., S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50.
Leicester, S., 3.10. Lowell, Rev. C. W. Huntington, _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 25. Lowell, Miss H. L. Dickenson, _for S. A., B. N.
Sch. Greenwood. S. C._, 1. Lynn, North, 38.52. Mansfield, 24.30.
Mansfield, Ortho., F. L. Cady's S. Class, _for Porto Rico_, 5.46.
Melrose, 25. Middleboro, Central, 5. Millis, S., Lincoln Mem., 5.
Mittineague, 13.80. Neponset, C. E., 1.12. New Bedford, North, ad'l
2. Newburyport, Oldtown C., S., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. New
Salem, 5.80. Newton Eliot, 220. Northampton, Edwards, 67.36.
Northampton, Edwards Ladies, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 14. North
Andover Depot, C., Lincoln Mem., 6.10. North Brookfield, First, 2.05.
North Middleboro, 24.86. Pepperell, 20.55. Reading, 30. Saugus,
23.05. Sheffield, C. E., _for Macon, Ga._, 10. Southfield, C. E. of
Baptist and Cong'l C., _for Macon, Ga._, 2. South Royalston, Second,
8. South Weymouth, Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for A. N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 43, _and for S. A., Joseph K. Brick, A. I. and N.
Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 25. Springfield, Hope, 48.99; Memorial, C. E.,
10; Olivet, S., 3.15. Springfield, C. B. Dye, _for S. A., Fisk U._,
5. Springfield, C. of the Unity, L. B. S., bbl. Goods; First, L. H.
M. S., Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Taunton, Miss Linda Richards,
_for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 6. Ware, Prim. Dept. in East C.,
_for Indian M._, 8.70. Warren, Mrs. Mary L. Hitchcock, pkg. Tracts,
_for McIntosh, Ga._ Watertown, Phillips, 100. Wellesley Hills, "S,"
309. Wenham, 10. West Andover, Primary S., 2, "Friend," 30 cts., _for
Mountain Work_. Westborough, L. B. Soc., _for Saluda, N. C._, 25.
West Boylston, 3.80. Westfield, First, 60.10. West Medford, 16.25.
Weymouth Heights, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Straight U._
Wilbraham, First, _for Sch'p, Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 8.
Woburn, North, Bessie Barker Jr. C. E., _for Skyland Inst., N. C._,
5. Worcester, Plymouth, 75.38; Union, 57.45; Piedmont, 48.50; A. L.
Smith, 30. Worcester, Pilgrim, S., _for Athens, Ala._, 3.

----, "A Friend," _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I., Miss
Lizzie D. White, Treas., $565.00:

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese_,
20. Jr. C. E. of Three Rivers, Mass., and Mrs. G. S. Butler of Union,
N. H., _for two native helpers at Mitletok, Alaska_, 65.

ESTATES.--Brockton, Estate of Hannah B. Packard, 500. Northampton,
Estate of Maria B. Gridley, 16.80.


RHODE ISLAND, $111.03.

Central Falls, 28.11. Chepachet, 20. East Greenwich, Swedish C., 1.
Providence, Beneficient, 49.92. Providence, Central C., _for
Talladega C._, 10. Providence, Mrs. A. G. Thompson, _for Porto Rico_,
5.


CONNECTICUT, $5,037.65--of which from Estate, $3,500.00.

Berlin, Golden Ridge, M. C., _for Tougaloo U._, 25. Bolton, 4.09.
Branford, 64. Bridgewater, 10. Bridgeport, South, C. E., _for Sch'p,
Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Bridgeport; South, L. S., bbl.
Goods, _for Cappahosic, Va._ Bristol, 50.45. Danbury, First, 47.12.
East Canaan, L. A. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Eastford,
5.37. East Haven, 6. Easton, Rev. E. P. Ayer, pkg. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._ Greenwich, Second, 139.62. Groton, 11.94.
Hadlyme, R. E. Hungerford, 25; J. W. Hungerford, 25. Hartford, First,
137.93; Asylum Hill, "A Friend," 5. Hartford, Daniel Phillips, _for
S. A., Talladega C._, 25. Jewett City, W. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
A. N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ Lebanon, First, 30.77. Lebanon,
Miss H. E. Leach, _for A. N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 2.
Ledyard, L. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Cappahosic, Va._ Manchester,
Second. 39.58. Mansfield Center, First, 7.70. Meriden, Jr. C. E.,
_for Tougaloo U._, 1. Middlebury, 21. Milford, Plymouth, 14.94;
First, 5. Nepaug, C. E., 3; "Friends," 3, _for Wilmington, N. C._ New
Hartford, C., L. A. Soc., 8, and bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
New Haven, Church of Redeemer, Y. L. M. S., 10. New Haven,
Livingstone Cleveland, 5; United C., bbl. Goods, _for Macon, Ga._
Norwich, Second, C. E., _for Athens, Ala._, 10. Old Lyme, First,
18.50. Portland, C. E., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Plainville,
21.95. Seymour, L. B. Soc., _for freight to Saluda, N. C._, 1.73
South Windsor, 15.45. Suffield, K. D. Circle, _for S. A., Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 5. Talcottville C., S. Books, _for Thomasville, Ga._
Thomaston, First, 15.50. Tolland, 16.59. Torringford and Burrville,
23.08. Wallingford, L. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Cappahosic, Va._
Waterbury, Second, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 50.
Westchester, 8. West Suffield, 20.63. Whitneyville, 9.50. Winsted,
Jr. Workers, _for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._, 25.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONNECTICUT, by Mrs. Geo.
Follett, Secretary, $554.21.

Bridgeport, Park St., 25. Higganum, 14.25. Kent, 50. New Haven,
Plymouth, 50. Norwich, Park, 170.92; Broadway, 150; Second, 52.35;
Greenville, 15; Taftville, 9; First, 17.69, _for Teacher at Blowing
Rock, N. C._

ESTATE.--Torrington, Estate of Lauren Wetmore, 3,500.


NEW YORK, $1,758.98.

Binghamton, Mrs. Edward Taylor, 10. Brooklyn, Ch., of the Pilgrims,
Boys' Mis. Soc., _for Alaska M._, 300. Brooklyn, Church of the
Pilgrims, ad'l, 100; Clinton Ave., Cong. S., 25; Clinton Ave., C. E.
League, _for Porto Rico_, 15; Immanuel, C. E., 7.10. Brooklyn, South,
"Lend-a-Hand Club," _for Troy, N. C._, 5; Geo. H. Shirley, _for Porto
Rico_, 2. Zenana Band of Cong. C., bbl. Goods, _for Williamsburg,
Ky._; Central C., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Marshallville, Ga._
Buffalo, First, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 3.81. Clifton Springs,
"Friends," two bbls. Bedding, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ Currytown,
"In His Name," 99.84. Ellington, S., 4.25. Havilah, Miss C. A.
Talcott, 1.50. Hopkinton, Mrs. C. A. Laughlin, 5; C. E., 2.61. Maine,
8.05. Newark Valley, "Friends," bbl. Bedding, _for King's Mountain,
N. C._ New York, Broadway Tabernacle, "A Friend," (25 of which _for
Porto Rico_), 50; Manhattan, to const. EDWIN D. EAGER L.M. 45.87; "S.
E. G.," 25. New York, Mrs. Chas. Hamm, _for Mountain White Work_, 10.
New York, Mt. Hope C., W. M. Assoc, _for King's Mountain, N. C._,
1.25. Orient, 15.47. Philadelphia, "C. E. of Cong. C.," 5. Plainfield
Centre, Welsh, 6. Rensselaer Falls, L. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Richmond Hill, Union, S., Lincoln Mem., 9.40.
Richmond Hill, W. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Marshallville, Ga._
Rochester, T. O. Hamlin, 25. Saratoga Springs, C., Ladies' Union,
bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Sherburne, First, 167.05.
Sherburne, S., quarterly, 29.47. Spencerport, J. B. Clark, 1.
Syracuse, Plymouth, S., 15.60, Tarrytown, "A Friend," _for Alaska
M._, 25. Walton, L. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Warsaw, "Earnest Workers," _for Porto Rico_, 25. Warsaw, 11.22.
Warsaw; ----, two bbls. Goods, _for Tougaloo U._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $702.50.

Brooklyn, Plymouth, 50; Clinton Ave., Y. W. G., 49; Ch. of the
Pilgrims, 33; Puritan, _for Chinese Mothers_, 10; Clinton Ave., Boys'
M. Band and Pioneer Band, _for Porto Rico_, 15; Lewis Ave., E. C., 6;
Clinton Ave., 6.15; Bushwick Ave., K. D., 5. Binghamton, First,
Helpers S., 45 to const. MRS. O. P. CHASE, L. M. Buffalo, First, W.
G. B. Aux., 35; First, W. G. H. M., 25. Cortland, 25. Crown Point,
15.86. Elbridge, Jr. C. E., 10. Ellington, Jr. C. E., 4. Flushing,
S., 14.05. Flushing, 5. Gloversville, 10. Hamilton, C. E., 8.
Hamilton, 3. Homer, S., Lincoln Mem., 4.80, _for Porto Rico_, 5.
Honeoye, 5. Ithaca, S., 32.40. Middletown, First, Mrs. Tice's S.
Class, 5. Moravia, Mrs. W. C., Tuthill, 40 (of which 25 _for S. A.,
Big Creek Gap, Tenn._) New Haven, 30. New York, Broadway Tabernacle
Society, _for Women's Work_, 48. Oswego, 10. Orient, 24.50.
Phoenix, S., 5 _for Porto Rico_, 6.79 Lincoln Mem. Poughkeepsie,
20. Pulaski, 10. Syracuse, G. S. C., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._, 31.95. Syracuse, 5. Utica, Plymouth, 20. Utica, Plymouth, Jr.
C. E., 5. Walton, 20.


NEW JERSEY, $339.04.

East Orange, Trinity, Jr. K. D., 5. Elizabeth, Mrs. E. J. Dimoch,
_for Tougaloo U._, 10. Montclair, First, 236.90. Montclair, by Miss
Hove, _for Marshallville, Ga._, 2.25. Montclair, First, W. M. S.,
bbl. Goods, _for Marion, Ala._ Newark, W. E. Titus, 25. Paterson,
Auburn, St., 26.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N., by Mrs. G. A. L.
Merrifield, Treas., $33.64.

East Orange, W. S. for C. W., 33.64.


PENNSYLVANIA, $374.75--of which from Estate, $300.00.

Braddock, First, 2.50; S., 2.63; Jr. C. E., 1.50. Carlisle, Mrs.
Dorsett, _for S. A., Skyland Inst._, N. C., 10. Corry, box Papers,
_for Meridian, Miss._ Pittsburg, Mr. and Mrs. M. C. Adams, 25, Mrs.
S. Jarvis Adams, 25, _for New Laundry, Orange Park, Fla._ Scranton,
Plymouth, S., Lincoln Mem., 8.12.

ESTATE.--Lander, Estate of Alfred Cowles, by M. E. Cowles, Executor,
300.


OHIO, $3,480.04.

Akron, First, 61.82; Miss Rachel Davies, 2. Ashland, 12.73. Aurora, C
E., bbl. Goods, _for Nat, Ala._ Cincinnati, Storrs, S., _for S. A.,
Orange Park, Fla._, 1. Claridon, "A Friend," _for Indian M., Fort
Yates, N. D._, 50. Cleveland, Pilgrim, quarterly, 72; Plymouth, 19.
Elyria, H. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Garrettsville, 15.20. Huntsburg, Jr. C. E., bbl. Goods, _for Orange
Park, Fla._ Mansfield, Ladies' M. Society, bbl. Goods, _for Tillotson
C._ Marietta, First, 71.70.

Oberlin, Jabez L. Burrell, deceased, 10,057 (less expenses, 3.35),
10,053.65, reserve account, 7,053.65, 3,000.

Oberlin, First, 24.44. Oberlin "Friends," _for Talladega C._, 5.50.
Painesville, First, 26.75. Sandusky, First, S., 5. Steubenville,
First, 10.50. Toledo, Washington St., 17.66. Youngstown, Miss Maude
Slemons, _for S. A., B. N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas.,
$85.74.

Chatham, 3.50. Cincinnati, 4.80. Cleveland, Lake View, 2.88.
Cleveland, Euclid, 5; First, 6. Conneaut, 5.25. Elyria, C. E., 6.25.
Lafayette, S., 2.23. Lorain, 7.50. Mansfield, Mayflower, 3. Marietta,
First, 6. Mesopotamia, S., 30 cts. North Fairfield, C. E., _for Porto
Rico_, 1. Olmsted, Second, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Toledo, Washington
St., 11.03. Wakeman, 9. Youngstown, Elm St., 5.


INDIANA.

Fort Wayne, Mrs. Hattie Hunting's S. Class, thirteen Aprons, _for A.
G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._


ILLINOIS, $993.05--of which from Estate, $226.35.

Chicago, Rev. E. M. Williams, to const. REV. ROY B. GUILD, L.M., 50;
New England, 22.09. New England, S., 25.42; Mizpah Chapel, 3.97 and
S. S., 1.90; Sen. C. E., 1.88; Jr. C. E., 1.25; Central Park, C. E.,
2. Chicago, Wm. Dickinson, _for Talladega C._, 50. Chicago, Rev. and
Mrs. E. M. Williams, _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 15. Chicago, Miss
Julia H. Haskell, _for New Laundry, Orange Park, Fla._, 10. Chicago,
Tabernacle S., _for Nat, Ala._, 3. Chicago, Thos. W. Woodnutt,
"Leaflets," _for Talladega C._

Dundee, 17.42. Dundee. C. E., 7. Evanston, First, 86.13. Geneseo. W.
H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Geneva, 11.41. Grossdale,
W. H. M. U., 3.90. Mendon, 17. Oak Park, First, S., 18.23. Ottawa,
First, to const. HENRY W. JONES L.M., 36.69. Payson, Mr. and Mrs. L.
K. Seymour, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Plainfield, Mrs. Adeline E.
Hagar, to const. MISS S. ELIZABETH ROYCE L.M., 30. Plainfield, 27.50.
Providence, 12.83. Sycamore, Mrs. Helen A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 5. Waukegan, S., 2.20. Wheaton College C., S., _for Macon Ga._,
10. Woodstock, M. and E. Young, _for Marion, Ala._, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. Mary S. Booth,
Treas., $283.88.

Abingdon, 3.90. Chicago, South, _for Schp., Talladega C._, 50.80.
Chicago, New England, (5 of which _for Porto Rico_), 11.75. Chicago,
University, C., 15; Grace, Jr. C. E., 20 cents. Chicago, Douglass
Park, 2; Lincoln Park, 3.25. Downers Grove, 8. La Grange, 20. Mazon,
1. Moline, First, _for Fisk U._, 13.50. Neponset. 7. Oak Park,
Second, _for Schp., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 50. Port Byron, 5.
Rockford, Second, 16. Rockford, 2.50. Rogers Park, 5. Rollo, 10.
Seward, Winnebago Co., 9.10. Thawville, 1.50. Toulon, 8.38. Waukegan,
5. W. H. M. U., Undesignated Funds, 35.

ESTATE.--Galena, Estate of Mrs. Julia Estey Montgomery, 226.35.


MICHIGAN, $416.25--of which from Estate, 95.60.

Benton Harbor, C. E., 2.91. Ceresco, S., Lincoln Mem., 1. Church, A.
W. Douglass, "Thank Offering," 20. Detroit, First, 160; Boulevard,
5.10. Detroit Woodward Ave. C., Ladies, _for S. A., B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._, 25. Eaton Rapids, S., 1. Grand Rapids, Mrs. W. M.
Palmer, _for Skyland Inst., N. C._, 5. Grand Rapids, Plymouth, 1.25.
Greenville, First, S., 10.05. Lansing, Plymouth, S., 4.94. Mason,
Etchell's A. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Olivet, C. E.,
_for Tillotson C._, 5. Richmond, First, 4.60. Saint Joseph, First, C.
E., 5. So. Haven, S. Class, _for Marion, Ala._, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICH., by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $66.80.

Detroit, First, 20. Ellsworth, 3.50. Ellsworth, Children, 4. Flint,
Jr. C. E., _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 25 cents.
Greenville, 3.95. Muskegon, First, 11.45. Red Jacket, 20. Wheatland,
3.50. Williamston, 15 cents.

ESTATE.--Hillsdale, Estate of Mathews Joslyn, 95.75.,(less expense,
15 cts.), by L. B. Wolcott, Administrator, 95.60.


IOWA, $199.84.

Albia, Mrs. Mary A. Payne, 2. Ames, First, 14.75. Ames, S., _for Nat,
Ala._, 5. Belmond, 4. Belle Plain, Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Henry, 10.
Clay, 10. Cromwell, Ladies' H. M. S., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2.50.
Davenport, Edwards Ch., 9.25. Des Moines, Mrs. L. R. Munger, _for
Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._, 2.50. Dubuque, Summit, 25.71. Fort
Dodge, Ladies' M. Soc., _for New Laundry, Orange Park, Fla._, 10.
Garwin, Talmon Dewey, 3.50. Grinnell, S., 18.03. Harlan, 6.
Maquoketa, First, 1.70. Waterloo, Alice Spofford, 60 cts.; Mrs. M. E.
Warner, 40 cts.; "A Friend," 25 cts., _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$73.65.

Central City, 5. Cedar Rapids, First, S., 49 cts. Des Moines,
Plymouth, 2.91. Dubuque, Summit, M. G., 2.50. Greenwood, L. A. Soc.,
(25.12 of which _for Porto Rico_), 50.25. Mason City, 7.50.
Postville, 5.


WISCONSIN, $143.72.

Black Earth, Miss Etta Logan, 1. Clintonville, L. M. S., 5. Dartford,
3.75. Delavan, 7.94. Elkhorn, W. A. Soc., 5; "A Friend," 50 cts.;
----, two bbls. Goods, _for Fisk U._ Fulton, Rev. A. S. Reid, 2.
Kenosha, First, 9.68. Ironton, O. C. Blanchard, 5. Mazomanie, 5.
Milwaukee, Grand Ave., 38.55. Pewaukee, 7. Spring Green, 1.70.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $51.60.

Arena, First, 1.23. Beloit, Second, 5. Delavan, 1.50. Madison, 10.
Rochester, 7.21. Sun Prairie, 1.66. Whitewater, 25.


MINNESOTA, $349.40.

Freedom, 2.46. Glenwood, Mrs. F. M. Eddy, _for New Laundry, Orange
Park, Fla._, 3. Grand Meadow, 6. Lamberton, "A Friend," 50. Lamberton,
10. Medford, 4.56. Minneapolis, Plymouth, S., _for Porto Rico_,
27.92. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 22.65. Minneapolis, Fifth Ave., 4.78;
Jr. C. E., 1. Zumbrota, First, 9.02.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
Treas., $213.01, (less expenses, $5), $208.01.

Austin, 15.10. Austin, C. E., 11.66. Brownton, 2.60. Benson, 1.
Clearwater, C. E., 1. Excelsior, 2.65. Hawley, 3.50. Hancock, 9.
Mapleton, Jr. C. E., 2. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 29; Lyndale, 21.64;
First, 11.50; Park Ave., 5.28; Fremont Ave., 3. Spring Valley, 15.
Spring Valley, C. E., 5. Sauk Centre, 5.08. Saint Paul, Park, 16;
Mrs. Hunt, 1. Saint Paul, Plymouth, 15; University, 1. Saint Anthony
Park, 4. Wadena, S., 2. Winona, 30.


MISSOURI, $561.76.

Cameron, 26.25. Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg, _for Porto Rico_, 50.
Saint Louis, Bethlehem, Bohemian, 3.75 Saint Louis, Miss L. Meyer,
_for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MISSOURI, by Mrs. A. J. Steele,
Treasurer, $508.86 (less expenses, 30.10), $478.76.

Aurora, 4. Bonne Terre, 10. Cameron, 6.64. Carthage, 7.10. De Soto,
2. Hannibal, First, 2. Kansas City, First, 49.21; Clyde, 11.58;
Beacon Hill, 3.61; Olivet, 3.60; S. W. Tabernacle, 3.88. Kidder,
First, 2. Lebanon, 8.65. Meadville, 2. Neosho, 3.60. Saint Louis,
Pilgrim, 152.20; First, 93.31; Compton Hill, 25.48; Central, 21.12;
Fountain Park, 12.30; Hyde Park, 5.66; Memorial, 5.81; Reber Place,
5.66; Plymouth, 2; Hope, 3; Immanuel, 2. Saint Joseph, 13. Sedalia,
First, 10; Second, 1. Springfield, First, 23.21. Pierce City, 6.12.
Webster Groves, 7.12.


KANSAS, $55.00.

Fairview, Plymouth, 5. Manhattan, Wm. E. Castle, 12. Twelve Mile, 3.
Valley Falls, First, 10. Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ 16.


NEBRASKA, $48.00.

Creighton, 5. Fremont, Jr. C. E., _for A. N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 2. Minersville, 3. Omaha, Rev. R. S. Sargent, _for
S. A., Straight U._ 5. Urbano, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NEB., by Mrs. C. J. Hall, Treas.,
$30.00.

Cambridge, Ladies, 10. W. H. M. U., of Nebraska, 20.


NORTH DAKOTA, $20,00.

----, "A Friend," 20.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $31.18.

Bonne Homme, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $28.18.

Academy, Jr. C. E., 1.18. Columbia, Jr. C. E., 1.25. Elizabeth
Memorial Ass'n, 4. Elk Point, 5. Plankinton, 1.50. Redfield, 4. Rapid
City, 1.50. Santee, Pilgrim, 3.25. Sioux Falls, 2.50. Wakonda, 4.


UTAH, $3.50.

Salt Lake City, First, W. H. M. S., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad.,
Ga._, 3.50.


COLORADO, $17.50.

Lafayette, 17.50.


CALIFORNIA, $170.95.

Los Angeles, Miss ELLEN H. LIBBY, to const. herself L.M., 30.
Norwalk, Bethany (1 of which _for Alaska M._.), 3.75. Santa Barbara,
8.20.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, by Mrs.
Katharine D. Barnes, Treas., $129.00.

W. H. M. U. of So. Cal., 129.


OREGON, $36.75.

Hubbard, 2; Smyrna, 5.50; Elliott Prairie, 1.25, _for Porto Rico_.
Portland, First, 28.


WASHINGTON, $3.20.

Alderton, 1.60. McMillin, 60 cts. Orting, 1.


MARYLAND.

Baltimore, Estate of Mrs. Mary R. Hawley (Reserve Legacy), 17.46.


KENTUCKY, $5.00.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 3. Newport, York St., S., 2.


TENNESSEE, $12.70.

Grand View, Miss Mary E. Taylor, _for S. A., Grand View_, 1.50
Jellico, C., 1; S., 1. Jonesboro, H. M. S., 1. Soddy, Welsh, 7.20.
Wilson's Grove, 1.


NORTH CAROLINA, $8.14.

Enfield, Chapel Collection, _for Joseph K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch.,
Enfield, N. C._, 1.64. McLeansville, First, Lincoln Mem., 2.25.
McLeansville, Eliza Torrence, 50 cts.; Dulcina Torrence, 50 cts.;
Rev. M. L. Baldwin, 1. Salem, 2.25.


GEORGIA, $22.73.

Athens, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 4.10. Cypress Slash, C. and S.,
3.50. Marietta, C., 2.20; Rev. S. A. Paris, 1.25; Mrs. A. J. Rogers,
1. Thomasville, Bethany, 4.81; Bethany S., 87 cts.; Jefferson St.
Mission, 59 cts.; "Friend," 1. Woodville, Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke,
_for Mountain Work_, 50 cts.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF GA., by Miss Mattie L. M. Turner,
Treas., $2.91.

Savannah, First, 2.91.


ALABAMA, $26.40.

Mobile, First, W. M. U., 5. Talladega, S., 7.33; Needmore M., 32
cts.; McCannville M., 75 cts. Talladega, Miss E. A. Barnes, _for S.
A. Talladega C._, 8. Talladega, Cove C., _for Talladega C._, 5.


LOUISIANA, $28.69.

New Orleans, University C., 15.67; University Grammar Sch. Pupils,
3.96. Hammond, C., 4.85; S., 1.21. New Iberia, 3.


FLORIDA, $60.58.

Daytona, 22.08. Jacksonville, W. W. Cummer, _for New Laundry, Orange
Park, Fla._, 30. Tampa, First, 8.50.


MISSISSIPPI, $9.00.

Tougaloo, Mrs. Sisson, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 9.


TEXAS, $7.00.

Corpus Christi, Lincoln Mem., S. Service, 7.


INCOME, $1,758.89.

Avery Fund _for African M._, 667.22. Mrs. S. N. Brewer End. Fund,
20.93. Howard Carter End. Fund, 5.07. De Forest Fund, _for
President's Chair, Talladega C._, 67.50. C. F. Dike Fund, _for
Straight U._, 50. E. B. Eldridge End. Fund, 225. Erwin Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 500. Fisk U. Theo. Fund, 4.50. Rev. B. Foltz End.
Fund, 5.07. General Endowment Fund, 50. Hammond Fund, _for Straight
U._, 30. Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 20.28. E. A. Hand End.
Fund, 11.25. Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._, 55.07. S. M. Strong
End. Fund, _for Saluda, N. C._, 27. J. and L. H. Wood Sch'p Fund,
_for Talladega C._, 20.


TUITION, $5,458.03.

Cappahosic, Va., 51.90. Williamsburg, Ky., 112.05. Grand View, Tenn.,
25.75. Grand View, Public Fund, 39. Knoxville, Tenn., 63.60. Memphis,
Tenn., 583.85. Nashville, Tenn., 882.59. Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 89.65.
Beaufort, N. C., 27.30. Blowing Rock, N. C., 47. Chapel Hill, N. C.,
4.75. Enfield, N. C., 31.25. Hillsboro, N. C., 27.70. King's
Mountain, N. C., 30.00. Saluda, N. C., Public Fund, 75. Saluda, N.
C., 32.85. Troy, N. C., 2.70. Whittier, N. C., 23.95, Wilmington, N.
C., 238.55. Charleston, S. C., 315.20. Greenwood, S. C., 142.11.
Albany, Ga., 79.75. Andersonville, Ga., 13.95. Atlanta, Ga., 237.84.
McIntosh, Ga., 100.67. Macon, Ga., 260.15. Marietta, Ga., 4.
Marshallville, Ga., 21. Savannah, Ga., 185.40. Thomasville, Ga.,
92.35. Athens, Ala., 37.30. Florence, Ala., 35.85. Marion, Ala.,
60.00. Nat, Ala., 20.42. Mobile, Ala., 119.55. Talladega, Ala.,
144.95. Meridian, Miss., 73.50. Moorhead, Miss., 40.70. Tougaloo,
Miss., 123.30. Helena, Ark., 300.70. New Orleans, La., 489.35. Orange
Park, Fla., 52.90. Austin, Tex., 117.65.


SUMMARY FOR APRIL, 1900.

  Donations                                            $15,401.25
  Estates                                                6,457.79
                                                      -----------
                                                       $21,859.04
  Income                                                 1,758.89
  Tuition                                                5,458.03
                                                      -----------
  Total for April                                      $29,075.96


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for April                                  $10.40
  Previously acknowledged                                  228.89
                                                         --------
                                                          $239.29

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for May                                       $10,380.00
  Previously acknowledged                               32,466.73
                                                      -----------
                                                       $42,846.73
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $206.72.

Biddeford, Second, 22.50. Farmington Falls, 2.50. Lewiston, Miss S.
L. Weymouth, _for S. A., Greenwood, S. C._, 2.50. Madison, 11. New
Sharon, 1.50. North Norway, Miss Sarah A. Holt, 4.50. Otisfield, C.
E., 7.75; Mrs. Susan Lovell, 3. Portland, West, 11. Portland, "C. E."
_for McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Portland, State St. Sewing Soc., two bbls.
Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._ Searsport, First, 6.02. Turner, Rev. C.
S. Wilder's S. Class, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 1. Wilton, 10.65.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. Helen W. Davis, Treas.,
$120.80.

Brunswick, 44. Calais, 25. Machias, 31.05. Marshfield, 1.75. Steuben,
4. Woodfords, 15.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $406.53--of which from Estate, $178.70.

Alstead Center, Ladies' C., _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1. Center Harbor,
2.10. Epping, C., 5.43; Mrs. G. N. Shepard's S. Class, 4.10. Gilsum,
3. Greenville, C., 25; S., 5. Hampton, 5.50. Keene, Second, S. Class,
bbl. Goods, prepaid freight, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Lebanon, C. (7.40
of which _for Porto Rico_) 37.70. Lyndeboro, 7.30. Manchester, First,
Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for Sch'p, Fisk U._, 25. Manchester, Mr. and
Mrs. A. H. Hale, 10. Nashua, Alfred Chase, to const. REV. PAUL FOX
L.M., 30. Nashua, First, C. E., bbl. Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
New Market, Thos. H. Wiswall, 10. New Market, Estate of Mrs.
Creighton, two boxes Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ North
Londonderry. S., _for Indian M._, 3.20. Raymond, MRS. H. M. HARRIMAN,
to const. herself L.M., 30. Winchester, Rev. C. Roper, _for freight
to McIntosh, Ga._, 2. West Concord, Y. S. M. C., bbl. Goods, _for
Tougaloo U._

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. and HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $21.50.

Concord, South, Mrs. A. M. Nim's S. Class, 8.50. Milford, 12. West
Lebanon, Jr. C. E., 1.

ESTATE.--Milford, Estate of Mrs. C. B. Harris, 178.70


VERMONT, $749.33--of which from Estate, $30.96.

Barnet, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, 1.50 _for freight, for McIntosh, Ga._
Brattleboro, Fessenden Helping Hand, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50.
Cambridge, Darwin Witherell, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 1. Cambridge,
Jeffersonville C., 8. Cornwall, C., to const. J. FRANK RANDALL L.M.,
40.58. Danville, 30. Essex Junction, First, ad'l, 1. Jericho Center,
First, 6.17. Manchester, Samuel G. Cone, 20. Manchester, 15.77.
Manchester, Miss E. J. Kellogg, 5. Pawlet, 4. Pittsford, 30.
Rochester, 6.58, Rutland, C., box Goods, _for Atlanta, Ga._ Saxton's
River, 6. West Dover, 2. Westfield, C. E., 5. West Rutland, 13.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert Mackinnon,
Treas., $472.77.

Bakersfield, 6.50. Barton, "A Tenth," _for Indian Sch'p_, 2. Barton,
10. Bennington, Second, Jr. C. E., 5. Brandon, 5. Brattleboro Center,
15. Brattleboro, West, 27.85. Brownington and Barton Landing, 5.
Burlington, First, 45. Burlington First, S., Mrs. Clarence Smith's
Class, _for Sch'p_, 5. Burlington, College St., 5. Cabot, 5.
Cambridge, 5. Chelsea, Sarah P. Bacon Benev. Soc., 12. Cornwall, 5.
Fairlee, 10. Ferrisburg, 7. Hardwick, East, 5. Hinesburgh, Jr. C. E.,
_for Sch'p_, 3. Johnson, 5. Manchester, 10. Montpelier, 10. Randolph,
8. Rutland, 15. Rutland, West. 5.50. Saint Johnsbury, South, 63.65.
Saint Johnsbury, North, 10. Saint Johnsbury, South, "A Friend," 45.
St. Albans, 25. Sheldon, 10. Shoreham, 6. So. Hero, Two Friends,
2.50. Springfield, 24.52. Stowe, 10. Swanton, 10. Underhill, 5.
Vergennes, 10. Waitsfield, 7. Weybridge, 5. Woodstock, 27.

ESTATE.--Springfield, Estate of Frederick Parks, 312.50; Reserve
Legacy account, 281.54, 30.96.


MASSACHUSETTS, $9,319.78--of which from Estates, $6,352.67.

Acton, Evan., S., 2. Andover, Chapel C., 68. Andover, West, "A
Friend," 5. Ayer, First, C. E., _for S. A., Talladega C._, 17.67.
Barre, S., 11.11

Boston, Old South, 185.15; Park St., 106; Geo. D. Bigelow, _for
Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 28. Jamaica Plain, Central, 198.
Roxbury, Walnut Ave. (10 of which _for Alaska M._), 40. West Roxbury,
South Evan., 93.50.

Brimfield, Rev. Oscar Bissell, 2. Brockton, C. E., _for Williamsburg,
Ky._, 1. Cohasset, Second, Ladies' B. Soc., two bbls. Goods, _for
Grand View, Tenn._ Concord, Trin., 20.25. Everett, Mystic Side C.,
bbl. Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._ Fall River, Central, C. E., _for S.
A., Fisk U._, 15. Fitchburg, Rollstone, 14.60. Florence, S., _for
Tougaloo U._, 5. Franklin. 13.54. Greenfield, Second. 41.62. Groton,
"Friend," _for Indian M._, 10; _for Freedmen_, 5; _for Mountain
Work_, 5; _for Chinese M._, 5; _for Porto Rico_, 5. Hanson, First,
3.16. Haverhill, Fourth, S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Haverhill,
Center, Ladies' M. Soc., box Goods, _for Fisk U._, Holyoke, Second,
63.16. Hyde Park, First, 66.10. Indian Orchard, Evan., 14.30.
Lawrence, Lawrence St., C., 25. Lawrence, Lawrence St., S., _for
Porto Rico_, 10. Littleton, 7. Lynn, North, S., 3. Lynn, North, 1.50.
Lunenburg, E, C., 3.25. Monson, 22.95. Medford, Mystic, 172.09.
Medford, Mystic, W. H. M. S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Maiden, S.,
_for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. Manchester, 15.50. Melrose, Highlands,
54.83. Newburyport, North, 18.06. Newburyport, Belleville Av., C. E.,
10. North Amherst, L. M. S., _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 5.
Northampton, Miss J. B. Kingsley, _for Marshallville, Ga._, 80.
Northampton, First, 215.39. Northampton, Edwards, Ladies, bbl. Goods,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Northboro, Evan., S., 3.09. North Brookfield,
Julia A. Miller, 5. North Brookfield, First, 2.25. North Wilbraham,
Grace Union, 2.50. North Woburn, Mrs. F. C. P. Wheeler's S. Class,
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10. Oxford, C. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._ Phillipston, C. E., Lincoln Mem., 2. Quincy,
Bethany, 52.99. Salem, Tabernacle, 10.91. Salem, "I. H. N.," 5.
Salem, Crombie St., S., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 2.
Salem, Mrs. B. H. Silsbee, seven Comfortables, _for Fisk U._
Shelburne Falls, Miss L A. Noble, _for Cappahosic, Va._, 1.
Somerville, Prospect Hill, to const. WILLIAM H. HARTSHORN, GEORGE W.
SNOW and THOMAS B. BLAIKIE L.M's, 95.72. Somerville, Winter Hill, C.
E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. Somerville, Highland, 5. Springfield,
Olivet, 23. Springfield, Memorial, C. E., _for Tougaloo U._, 15.
Springfield, "Three Friends," _for Fisk U._, 15. South Hadley Falls,
Augustus Moody, 10. South Royalston, Amos Blanchard, _for Porto
Rico_, 5. South Wellfleet. "A Friend," 1. Sunderland, 43.89. Sutton,
16.51. Turner's Falls, 18.87. Waltham, Trinity 16.17. Wayland, C. E.,
_for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 4. Westhampton, 24.54.
Westfield, First, 5. Westport, Pacific Union, 14.50. West
Springfield, Park St., 23.37. Weymouth Heights, First, 25.51.
Winchester, C., Miss'y Union, two bbls. Goods, _for Straight U._
Wollaston, 78.50. Worcester, First (Old South), 52.06. Worcester,
Piedmont, S., _for Brewer Normal Sch., Greenwood, S. C._, 25.
Worcester, L. M. S. of C., _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 15.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I., Miss
Lizzie D. White Treas., $560.00.

W. H. M. A., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese_, 80.

ESTATES.--Amherst, Estate of George E. Lamb, Henry W. Haskins,
Treas., 552,67. Andover, Estate of Mrs. Phoebe A. Chandler, by
Stephen Ballard and William H. Chandler, Exec'rs, 2,500. Andover,
Estate of Harriet L. Goodell, _for Mountain White Work_, 300, Lenox,
Estate of Orrilla B. Stanley, 5,000 (Reserve Legacy, 2,000), _for
Indian M._, by George H. Tucker, Trustee, 3,000.


RHODE ISLAND, $5.00.

Barrington, C., _for S. A., Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 5.


CONNECTICUT, $2,134.32--of which from Estate, $308.00.

Bethel, Mission Circle of C., _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 40.
Bethlehem, S., Lincoln Memorial, 3.75. Bridgeport, South, two bbls.
Goods, _for Cappahosic, Va._ Cheshire, W. H. Brooks, 10. Clinton, S.,
_for Porto Rico_, 5. Cornwall Hollow, C. E. Soc., _for Mountain White
Work_, 2. Coventry, Second, 16.72. Danbury, C., 6.31; S., 4. Darien,
20.52. Deep River, "Friends," _for Organ, Beaufort, N. C._, 2. Deep
River, Mrs. H. E. Denison, Material for Sewing Class, _for Beaufort,
N. C._ East Hartland, 7. East Wallingford, Mrs. Benjamin Hall, 2.
East Woodstock, Mrs. Carr, Sewing Material, _for Beaufort, N. C._
Gilead, 36. Greenfield Hill, 17.25. Groton. S., 17.62. Hartford,
Park, L. M. S., 10. Hartford, Glenwood, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Grand View, Tenn._ Higganum, 26. High Ridge, Long Ridge C., 3. Kent,
First, S., _for Mountain Work, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10. Lyme, "A
Friend," 5. Middletown, Gleaners Soc. of First C. (7.50 of which _for
Mountain Work_), 15. Nepang, C. E., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington,
N. C._, 3. New Haven, Fair Haven C., to const. REV. ALEXANDER F.
IRVINE L.M., 43.76. New Haven, Juliette T. Lyman, _for S. A., Macon,
Ga._, 10. New Haven, Dwight Place C., Bible Sch., _for Porto Rico_,
8.92. New Haven, Dwight Place, L. M. Soc., two bbls. Goods, _for Fisk
U._ New London, Second, 269.64, New Preston, Village C., 42. Niantic,
8. North Branford, 13.80. North Woodstock, Miss Esther Bishop, S.
Papers and 5, _for Organ, for Beaufort, N. C._ Norwich, Broadway, S.,
_for Mountain White Work_, 25. Portland, C. E., _for Williamsburg,
Ky._, 2. Putnam, C. and "A Friend," _for Organ, for Beaufort, N. C._,
15. Rockville, Union, 100. Somersville, 4.82. Sound Beach, Sr. C. E.
Jr. C. E. of Pilgrim C., one Comfortable each, _for Fisk U._ South
Manchester, 29.92. Southport, "Friends," through Mrs. E. S. Waterman,
_for Alaska M._, 340. South Woodstock, Third Ecc'l, 3.35. Stamford,
First, C. E., _for Mountain White Work_, 2.60. Stamford, Jr.
Endeavorers, 2.08. Stanwich, 8.65. Storrs, Second, bbl. Goods, _for
Porto Rico_. Suffield, First, 20.07. Suffield, Ashbel Harmon, _for
Straight U._, 10. Thomaston, First, S., _for Skyland Inst., Blowing
Rock, N. C._, 25. Thomson, 19.55. Wallingford, L. B. S., bbl. Goods,
1 _for freight, for Cappahosic, Va._ Waterbury, Second, W. B. Soc.,
_for Sch'p, Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 70. Wauregan, 22.50. Westport,
Saugatuck S., 4.39. West Torrington, L. H. M. S., box Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Westville, 26.91.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs. George Follett,
Sec.,$430.19.

W. H. M. U. of Conn., 215.44. Canton Center, 10. Canton Center, _for
Sch'p, Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8. East Woodstock, 10. Farmington, 6.
Hartford, South, _for Laundry, Moorhead, Miss._, 25. Milford,
Plymouth, 9. New Britain, South, 51.25. New Milford, 37.50. Norfolk,
_for Sch'p, Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8. Suffield, 50.

ESTATES.--Brooklyn, Estate of M. E. Ensworth, 8. Canton Center,
Estate of William G. Hallock, by Henry Humphrey, Ex'r, 300.


NEW YORK, $938.42.

Brooklyn, Clinton Ave. Boy's Mission Band, _for Sch'p Lincoln Acad.,
King's Mountain, N. C._, 40; _for Indian M._, 25; _for Porto Rico_,
15. Brooklyn, Zenana Band, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 9. Brooklyn, Park
Ave. C., Ladies and Jr. C. E., bbl. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N.
C._ Candor, 11. Fairport. S., _for S. A., Talladega C._, 10.
Fredonia, Martha L. Stevens. 50 cts. Gloversville, C., (45.52 of
which _for Fisk U._), 91.04. Honeoye, C., 19.25. Honeoye, C., bbl.
Literature, freight prepaid, _for Santee, Neb._ Ithaca, First, 47.95.
Jamestown, Mrs. E. Morgan, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 5. Munnsville,
3.25. New York, "Friend," _for Organ, Beaufort N. C._, 50. New York,
Mrs. Leland Fairbanks, 5. Norwich, First, 20. Rochester, Asbury,
King's D., bbl. Goods, _for Marion, Ala._ Sherburne, "A Friend." 25.
Sing Sing, Mrs. Cornelia E. Judd, 20. Watertown, Mrs. G. H. Wright,
Material for Sewing Class, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Whitehall, Mrs. J.
S. Dean, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $536.43.

W. H. M. U. of N. Y., _for Porto Rico_, 200. W. H. M. U. of N. Y., 30
cents Albany, First, S., Prim. Dept., 2. Brooklyn, Beecher Memorial,
5. Brooklyn, Central, 31.14. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave., Earnest Workers,
to const. ARTHUR F. STOIBER, L.M., 30. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave., C. E.,
bal. to const. MISS L. A. KNAPP, L.M., 20. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave.,
Zepho Circle, 5. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave., bal. to const. MRS. SARAH F.
MADDOX, MRS. A. J. MORRIS, MRS. ELIZABETH S. ROYS, L.M's, 50.
Brooklyn, Lee Ave., 20. Brooklyn, Tompkins Ave., Prim. Dept., 13.
Churchville, S., 5. Churchville, C. E., 5. Flushing, C. E., 6.
Gloversville, S., Prim. Dept. 2. Harford, Penn., 6. Honeoye, 6.
Honeoye, C. E., 3.50; Jr. C. E., 1. Jamestown, First, Jr. C. E., _for
Porto Rico_, 5. Madrid, C. E., 5. Morrisville. C. E., 24. New Haven,
"Willing Workers," 8. New York, Manhattan, 25. Oswego, (5 of which
_for Porto Rico_), 20. Poughkeepsie, C. E., 15. Syracuse, Geddes, 21.
Syracuse, Plymouth S., Prim. Dept., 2.49.


NEW JERSEY, $242.31.

Bound Brook. 81.21. Montclair, First, 100. Plainfield, W. M. Soc.,
1.10. ----, "A Friend," _for Fisk U._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE NEW JERSEY ASSOCIATION, by Mrs.
G. A. L. Merrifield, Treasurer, $55.00.

Bound Brook, "Pilgrim Workers," to const. MISS JULIA HAELIG, L.M. 30.
Washington, D. C., W. H. M. S., 25.


PENNSYLVANIA, $64.00.

Philadelphia, "A Friend," _for Fisk U._, 25. Philadelphia, Rev. S. D.
Paine, 3. Wilkesbarre, Second, Welsh, 1.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENN., by Mrs. David Howells, Treasurer,
$35.00.

Lansford,35.


OHIO, $407.72--of which from Estate, $140.02.

Canaan, Presb. C., bbl. Goods, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Claridon, "A
Life Member," 1. Cleveland, Euclid Ave., 28.58. Cleveland, L. V.
Dennis, _for S. A., J. K. Brick, A. I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._
10. Cleveland, Pilgrim C., K. D., bbl. Goods, freight prepaid, Mrs.
Wm. Leiburg, 1.21 and Jr. C. E., 2.20, _for freight_; Miss L. M.
Hardy, 2, _for McIntosh, Ga._, Columbus, First, 66.66. Creston, Miss
Hattie Rohrer, Material for Sewing Class, _for Beaufort, N. C._
Gomer, Welsh C., (5.75 of which _for Porto Rico_), to const. GEORGE
W. WILLIAMS, L.M., 40. Hampden, 2.05. Jewell, T. B. Goddard, 100.
Marietta, First, ad'l, 1. Strongsville, C., bbl. Goods, _for
Beaufort, N. C._ Wauseon, 13. West Salem, Miss Florence Carlin, bbl.
Literature, _for Beaufort, N. C._

ESTATE.--Atwater, Estate of Fanny B. Cumine, by J. Stratton,
Executor, 140.02.


INDIANA, $2.75.

Fairmount, First, S., 2.75.


ILLINOIS, $1,031.34.

Alton, Ch. of Redeemer, 79.50. Champaign, C., 40.91; W. M. S., 1.80;
C. E., 6.10; Jr. C. E., 20 cts.; Boys Brigade, 50 cts. Chandlerville,
41.97.

Chicago, California Ave., 22.84. Chicago, Plymouth, 19.20. Chicago,
Mrs. C. H. Case, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._, 10. Chicago, "Friend,"
_for Indian M._, 5. Chicago, Mrs. Schielof and Friends, _for Athens,
Ala._ 4.50.

Downers Grove, First, 8.51. Galesburg, Central S., Lincoln Mem., 10.
Geneseo, _for freight to McIntosh, Ga._ 2.14. Griggsville, C., ad'l,
1. LaSalle, Mrs. Geo. A. Wilson, _for Tougaloo U._, 10. Melvin, 5.
Pecatonica, 7. Rockford, Second, 44.04. Sandwich, 28.55. Sycamore,
Mrs Helen A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Wilmette, First,
26.36.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. Mary S. Booth,
Treas., $651.22.

Illinois Undesignated Funds, 170. Illinois W. H. M. U., 3.86. Aurora,
New England, 20. Aurora, New Eng., C. E., 11. Ashkum 2.50. Champaign,
11.50. Champaign, Mrs. Schlenk, 5. Chandlerville, 7.50. Chenoa, _for
Blowing Rock_, 7; _Fisk U._, 4; _Crow Agency_, 4; _Moorhead_, 3.
Chicago, First, Jr. C. E., 1; Bethel, 3; Covenant, Jr. C. E., 1;
Covenant, 1; Covenant, 12.25; Evanston Ave., 2; Mizpah, 5; New
England, 1.80; Plymouth, Jr. C. E., 2; Union, 3; Union, C. E., 40
cts.; Union Park, 55; Warren Ave., 2; Waveland Ave., 5. Elgin. First,
20. Elmwood, 5. Evanston, First, 32. Illini, 5.50. Lombard, 40.50.
Melvin, 3. McLean, 5. Moline, Second, 2.50. Oak Park, First, 9.90.
Oak Park, First, Jr. C. E., 20 cts. Odell; 5. Payson, 12. Peoria,
First, 8. Plymouth, 3.76. Princeton, 10. Providence, 5. Ravenswood,
5. Sandwich, 13.75. South Chicago, 7.50. Sterling, 20. Sterling,
First, Jr. C. E., 2. Rock Falls, _for Schp._, 15. Rock Falls, 11.
Rockford, First, 25. Rockford, Second, 5. Toulon, 5. Waverly, C. E.,
5. Wheaton, First, 8. Wilmette, 12.80. Yorkville, 5.


MICHIGAN, $262.78.

Detroit, First, 125. Detroit, bbl. Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._
Jackson, First, Lincoln Mem., 9.62. Lansing, Plymouth, 20. Ludington,
30.50. Muskegon, First, 30.05; First, Bible Sch., 4.51. Saint Clair,
Mary Moore, _for freight on bbl. Goods to Orange Park, Fla._, 1.48.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $41.62.

Grand Rapids, Plymouth, 50 cts. Hancock, 8. Rockford, Jr. C. E., for
S. A., _Moorhead, Miss._, 4. Saginaw, Primary S., _for S, A.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 29.12.


IOWA, $621.56.

Alexander, First, 2.50. Bear Grove, 5. Burlington, Mrs. Mary S.
Leonard, 5. Cherokee, John Morrison, 30. Cromwell, Mrs. Kidder, and
Etta Child, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1. Des Moines, Pilgrim, 8.71.
Edgegood, L. D. Platt, 150. Eldora, Chas. McKeen Duren, _for S. A.
Grand View, Tenn._, 10. Emmetsburg, Boys and Girls Miss'y Army, 3.
Fairfax, 2.43. Glenwood, C. E., 2.65. Hampton, First, 13.11. Hampton.
S., 3.80. Independence, Miss Potwin's S. Class, _for Savannah, Ga._,
2.05. Jewell, First, 3. Le Mars, H. W. Wilcox, 1. McGregor, Mrs. T.
N. Gilchrist, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 3. Muscatine, Pilgrim,
4.41; S., 2; C. E., 1. Postville, 8.50. Salem, 10.66.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$348.74.

Anita, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 19.25. Anita, Jr. C. E., 50 cts. Central
City, 3. Chester Center, 4.50. Corning, 1.50. Creston, C. E., 5.
Creston, Jr. C. E., 2.96. Cedar Rapids, First, 6. Cedar Rapids, S.,
50 cts. Davenport, Beth., 1.50. Des Moines, Plymouth, 13.68. Fayette,
C. E., 1. Glenwood, 27.75. Grand View, 6.45. Grinnell, 57.29.
Hawarden, 10.67. Harwarden, Jr. C. E., 3. Independence, 12.10.
Independence, C. E., 1. Independence, Breeze and Geo. Boyack, 50 cts.
Iowa Falls, 10. Iowa City, 6. Lyons, 3.50, McGregor, 7.50.
Manchester, Jr. C. E., 6.55. Mason City, 8.21. Mondovi, 4. Mount
Pleasant, Ladies, 10.91; S., 90 cts. Muscatine, First, 16.67. New
Hampton, 10. Ottumwa, Second, 5. Rowan, C. E., 1.30; Jr. C. E., 2.
Salem, 13.30. Sioux City, First, Jr. C. E., 5. Tabor, 1.50. Waterloo,
33.25. Waterloo, C. E., 10. Winthrop, 14.25. Winthrop, Y. W. M. S.,
75 cents.


MINNESOTA, $73.26.

Appleton, 5.30. Barnesville, Mrs. F. L. Lewis, _for Skyland Inst.,
Blowing Rock, N. C._, 5. Brainerd, Peoples', 2. Excelsior, 5.25.
Hutchinson, 4.50. Meadow Vale, W. M. Soc., _for Mountain White Work_,
3.75. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 34.04. Minneapolis, Fifth Ave., S.,
7.42. Minneapolis, "A Friend," through John Rawlins Post, Flag, _for
Washburn Seminary, Beaufort, N. C._ Wadena, 6.


WISCONSIN, $110.30.

Elkhorn, First, W. A. Soc., two bbls. Goods, _for Fisk U._ La Crosse,
First, 49.74. Madison, K. D., 8; Jr. C. E., 3, _for Athens, Ala._ New
Richmond, Mrs. Tallmadge's, S. Class, _for Porto Rico_, 4.54.
Shopier, 4.13. Sun Prairie, 21.75. Windsor, 19.15.


MISSOURI, $56.50.

Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg, _for Porto Rico_, 50. Saint Louis,
Central, 6.50.


KANSAS, $70.59.

Westmoreland, 1.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF KANSAS, by Miss Mary E. Wilkinson,
Treas. $69.09.

Kansas W. H. M. U., 69.09.


NEBRASKA, $88.67.

Albion, 16.92 Crawford, First, 6. Dover, Camp Creek, C., 5.56.
Indianola, 8. Lincoln, Plymouth, 21.18. Omaha, Mrs. E. M. Richardson,
_for Straight U._, 5. Rokeby, C., 8.75; Rev. R. M. Sargent, D.D.,
2.91, _for Straight U._; 2.92, _for Tougaloo U._; 2.92, _for Memphis,
Tenn._ Silver Creek, 6.51. West Point, C., _for Santee Agency, Neb._,
2.


NORTH DAKOTA, $9.90.

Fessenden, First, 3.75. Fort Yates, Grand River, C., 4.65. Harvey,
1.50.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $39.80.

Aurora, 4.10. Bon Homme, 2. Ipswich, S., 1.50. Sioux Falls, S., Class
of Boys, 4; S., Class of Boys through Mrs. Carr, 3.90, _for S. A., A.
I. and N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ Tyndall First, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SO. DAK., by Mrs. Adda M. Wilcox,
Treas., $21.30, (of which $2.30 _for Porto Rico_).

Athol, 2.50. Chamberlain, 1. Clark, "A Friend," 2. Columbia, 2.30.
Firesteel, 5. Letcher, 1.25. Vermillion, 4. Vermillion, S., 1.75.
Watertown, 1.50.


WYOMING, $10.00.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF WYOMING, by Miss Edith McCrum, Treas.,
$10.00.

Cheyenne, First, 10.


COLORADO, $9.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF COLORADO, by Mrs. F. N. Thomas,
Treas., $9.00.

Denver, Boulevard, 4. Whitewater, 5.


ARKANSAS, $62.50.

Helena, Citizens, on Piano Fund, 62.50.


CALIFORNIA, $1,120.85.

Cloverdale, C., _for Chinese M._, 4. Oakland, Miss M. L. Newcomb, 60.
Porterville, 7.50. Rio Vista, C., _for Chinese M._, 20.

San Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see items
below), 1,029.35


OREGON, $35.00.

Cedar Mill, German C., 5. Hubbard, Jr. C. E., _for Moorhead, Miss._,
5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OREGON, Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Treas.,
$25.00.

Oregon W. H. M. U., 25.


WASHINGTON, $6.80.

Springdale, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.80. Union City, Skokomish C., 5.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $201.04.

Washington, First, 201.04.


MARYLAND.

Baltimore, Mrs. M. R. Hawley, Reserve Legacy. 7.27.


KENTUCKY, $21.60.

Berea, The Ch. of Christ, 19.60. Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 2.


TENNESSEE, $127.06.

Big Creek Gap, "K. C. L. G." (40 of which _for S. A._), 85. Grand
View, C., Ladies' Aid, 30.48; John Allen, 5. _for Bell Tower, Grand
View, Tenn._ Knoxville, From Entertainment, 1. Nashville, Union, Fisk
U., S., _for Porto Rico_, 5.58.


NORTH CAROLINA, $13.39.

Beaufort, "Friends," _for Organ, Beaufort, N. C._, 9.35. Candor, C,
Lincoln Mem., 1.20 Enfield, Chapel Col., 54 cts. Malee, C., Lincoln
Mem., 50 cts. Pekin, 1.80.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $1.00.

Winnsboro, 1.


GEORGIA, $5.01.

Demorest, Union, 2.76. Taylor's Creek, Shiloh C. and S., 1.75.
Thomasville, Bethany Ch., C. E., 50 cts.


ALABAMA, $23.75.

Nat, Bending Oaks, C., 3.75.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ALABAMA, by Mrs. E. C. Silsby,
Treas., $20.00.

Alabama, W. M. U., 20.


MISSISSIPPI, $10.00.

Tougaloo, Miss Blanchard, _for Tougaloo U._, 10.


TEXAS, $5.00.

Goliad, 5.


HAWAII ISLANDS, $5.00.

Honolulu, Mrs. Henry C. Brown, 5.


INCOME, $431.26.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 158.75. C. F. Dike End. Fund, 45.63.
General End. Fund, 45.63. Hastings Schp Fund, _for Atlanta U._,
18.75. Howard Theo. End. Fund, _for Howard U._, 37.50. Le Moyne Fund,
_for Memphis, Tenn._, 37.50. Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 50.
Tuthill King End. Fund, _for Berea C._, 37.50.


TUITION, $4,548.19.

Cappahosic, Va., 36.65. Lexington, Ky., 125.25. Williamsburg, Ky.,
97.95. Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 109.32. Big Creek Gap, Tenn., Public
Fund, Grand View, Tenn., 23.50. Knoxville, Tenn., 57.45. Memphis,
Tenn., 508.90. Nashville, Tenn., 646.92. Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 34.
Beaufort, N. C., 27.50. Blowing Rock, N. C., 18. Chapel Hill, N. C.,
5.70. Enfield, N. C., 17.25. Hillsboro, N. C., 16.25. King's
Mountain, N. C., 30. Troy, N. C., 50 cts. Whittier, N. C., 18.25.
Wilmington, N. C., 127.27. Charleston, S. C., 306. Greenwood, S. C.,
133.66. Albany, Ga., 67.65. Andersonville, Ga., 11.72. Atlanta, Ga.,
248.28. McIntosh, Ga., 98.61. Macon, Ga., 298.75. Marshallville, Ga.,
Public Fund, 20. Savannah, Ga., 133.60. Thomasville, Ga., 80.23.
Athens, Ala., 66.05. Florence, Ala., 44.65. Marion, Ala., 60. Mobile,
Ala., 131.60. Nat, Ala., 31.10. New Orleans, La., 480.93. Orange
Park, Fla., 38. Helena, Ark., 43.95. Meridian, Miss., 90.75.
Moorhead, Miss., 41.50. Tougaloo, Miss., 92.45. Austin, Tex., 93.05.


SUMMARY FOR MAY, 1900.

  Donations                                            $11,488.23
  Estates                                                7,010.35
                                                      -----------
                                                       $18,498.58
  Income                                                   431.26
  Tuition                                                4,548.19
                                                      -----------
  Total for May                                        $23,478.03


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for May                                    $24.95
  Previously acknowledged                                  239.29
                                                         --------
  Total                                                   $264.24


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from March 21 to April
19, 1900, William Johnstone, Treas., $477.93.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $290.43.

Berkeley, Chinese M. O., 6.25. Fresno, Chinese M. O., 1.25; Ann'y
Off's, 21.17. Fruitland, Chinese M. O., 11.05; Ann'y Off's, 3.70. Los
Angeles, Chinese M. O., 4.05; Ann'y Off's, 28.02. Marysville, Chinese
M. O., 7.50. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 6.20. Oroville, Chinese M. O.,
1.40. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 2.65; Ann'y Off's, 17. Petaluma,
Chinese M. O., 3. Riverside, Chinese M. O., 5.51; Ann'y Off's, 6.
Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5.50. San Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 5.10;
Ann'y Off's, 14.25. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 4.18; Ann'y Off's, 6.
San Francisco, Central, Chinese M. O., 16.10; Ann'y Off's, 3, San
Francisco, First, C., _for Central M._, 45.05, San Francisco, West,
Chinese M. O., 4. San Francisco, Bethany, Ann'y Off's, 17.70. San
Francisco, Branch Ass'n, Christian Chinese, 10; Children, 58 cts.
Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O., 4.85. Ann'y Off's, 9.77. Santa Cruz,
Chinese M. O., 6.55. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 1.55; Ann'y Off's,
11.50.

CHURCHES, $4.50:

Los Angeles, Bethlehem, M. S., 2.50. Santa Rosa, C., Kingdom Ex.
Soc., 2.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $118.00:

Bangor, Me., Mrs. M. W. Chamberlain, 5. Minot, Me., Dea. Washburn,
10. Stockbridge, Mass., Miss Alice Byington, 100; Miss Adele Brewer,
3.

RECEIVED FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $65.00:

Huron, S. D., Miss K. M. Jenney, 5. W. H. M. U. of California, 60.

RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from April 20 to May 15,
1900, William Johnstone, Treas., $551.42.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $246.42: Berkeley, Chinese M. O., 6.15. Fresno
Chinese M. O., 2.55; Ann'y Pledges, 5. Fruitland, Chinese M. O.,
8.20. Los Angeles, Chinese M. O., 7.60; Ann'y Pledges, 42.
Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.50. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 3. Oroville,
Chinese M. O., 2.15. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 2.35; Ann'y Pledges,
22. Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 1. Riverside, Chinese M. O., 5.20; Ann'y
Pldges, 13. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 4.50. San Bernardino, Chinese
M. O., 2.75. Ann'y Off's 2. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 1.30; Ann'y
Off's, 6. San Francisco, Barnes, Chinese, M. O., 9.30. San Francisco,
S. F. Branch Ass'n, 10. San Francisco, Bethany, Ann'y Pledges, 13.50.
Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O., 5.10; Ann'y Off's, 27.25. Santa Cruz,
Chinese M. O., 7; Ann'y Off's, 24.52. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 1.50.

FROM INDIVIDUALS, $300.00:

Berkeley, Cal., Mrs. Harriet S. Blake, 100. Massachusetts, "S.," 200.

FOR MOTHERS AND GIRLS, $5.00: Belfast, Me., Miss E. M. Pond, 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.


  Income for June                                       $5,780.14
  Previously acknowledged                               42,846.73
                                                      -----------
                                                       $48,626.87
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $200.61.

Alfred, First, Y. L. C. A., 4.11. Brownville, Mrs. Jessie Mason, bbl.
Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Cape Elizabeth, South. Ladies' Aux., 5.
Castine, J. W. Dresser, _for Teachers' Home, McIntosh, Ga._, 20.
Eastport, H. Kilby's S. Class _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh,
Ga._, 2. Kennebunkport, Mrs. M. A. Smith, 50 cents Newcastle, Second,
12. Portland, Bethel C., Ladies, _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 4.
Portland, High St. C., bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Presque
Isle, 14. Sanford, Ladies of C., _for Marion, Ala._, 2.25. Southwest
Harbor, Mrs. Chas. Stanley, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 75
cts. Thomaston, Woman's Aux., _for Alaska_, 2. Vinalhaven, Union, 7.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID to A. M. A., by Mrs. H. W. Davis, Treas., $127.00.

Augusta, 14. Bethel, 23.30. Blue Hill, 3.70. Castine, 5.70.
Ellsworth, 17.38. Ellsworth Falls. 1.50. Freeport, 10. Gray, 3.25.
Harpswell Center, 12.25. North Ellsworth, 1.50. Orland, 9. Oxford, 4.
South Paris, First, L. M. S. 4.53; C. E., 2.61. Southwest Harbor,
1.50. Waterville, 7.78. Auburn, Sixth St. C., 5.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $307.84.

Alstead Center, Ladies' Circle, _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1.50.
Barnstead, S., _for Alaska M._, 6. Boscawen. 8.10. Colebrook, Mrs. W.
C. Buffington, 1. Dover. First, C. and S., 105.53. Hanover, C. E.,
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 3.12. Hollis, 13.82. Hollis, "A Friend,"
50 cents Keene, First, S., _for Porto Rico_ (9.03 of which Children's
Day coll.), 59.03. Laconia, Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N.
C._ Lisbon, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._
Littleton, First, C. E., 40. Littleton, John F. Tilton, _for Porto
Rico_, 2. Manchester. Franklin St. C., L. B. A., _for Gregory Inst.,
Wilmington, N. C._, 10. North Hampton, J. L. Philbrook, 10. Northwood
Center, 6.75. Penacook, 7.85. Plymouth, 28.23. Suncook, "A Friend,"
_for Gregory Just., Wilmington, N. C._, 2. Wakefield. 2.41.
Winchester, Ladies of C., bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._


VERMONT, $727.12.

Barnet, S., 9.17. Barnet, Mrs. S. E. Keneason, bbl. Goods, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Barre, 22.46. Brandon, 5.25. Ferrisburg, C., _for
Harriman. Tenn._, 6.75. Gaysville, 5. North Craftsbury, 3. North
Troy, Mrs. D. W. Kelley, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 5. Pittsfield, 5.
Rickers Mills, Mrs. A. B. Taft, 8. Rutland, W. H. M. S., _for
Knoxville, Tenn._, 5. Saint Johnsbury, North, "H." 25. Shoreham, Mrs.
E. C. Smith, _for freight to McIntosh, Ga._, 1.60. Springfield, "A
Friend," 50 cts. Townshend, "A Friend," 5. Wallingford, C. (5 of
which "in memory of Larane Andrews"), 37.25. West Charleston, S.,
_for S. A., Talladega C._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert Mackinnon,
Treas., $578.14.

Barnet, 11. Barre, 7.45. Barton, 10. Barton, Orleans Co. Coll., 4;
Special, 9. Bellows Falls, 10. Brandon, 13.25. Brattleboro, 20.
Brookfield, 11.25. Brookfield, Orleans Co. Coll., 2.65. Burlington,
College St., 20; First, 13.27. Burlington, _for Sch'p_, 2.26.
Cambridge, Mrs. Charlotte Safford, 50 cts. Chelsea, Jr. C. E., _for
Sch'p_, 2. Coventry, 5. Danville, 10. East Berkshire, 3. East
Enosburg, 15. Georgia, Franklin and Grand Isle, 5. Jeffersonville, W.
M. S., 1.40. Jericho Center, 5. Hinesburg, Mrs. T. J. Harris, 5.
Montpelier, 5. Newbury, 15. Newport, 21. Northfield, 15. North Troy,
5. Orwell, 19.75. Orwell, Jr. C. E., _for Sch'p_, 5. Pittsford, 25.
Pittsford, Mrs. Anna Boardman, 5. Rupert, 13.45. Saint Albans, 31.
Saint Johnsbury, Mrs. H. Fairbanks, 30; Mrs. F. H. Brooks, 15; Mrs.
T. M. Howard, 5; W. H. M. S., 12.25. Saint Johnsbury, South, Miss
Fairbanks, 6.50. Salisbury, 6.35. Springfield, Jr. C. E., 10.
Springfield; Mrs. Mary Woolson, 20. Waterbury, 5.13. Waterbury, Mrs.
Drew, 4. Waterville, 10. West Brattleboro, Jr. C. E., _for Sch'p_, 2.
West Charleston, 2. West Glover, 10. Windsor 15. Woodstock, _for
Sch'ps_, 10. Underhill, 1.

W. H. M. U. of Vermont, 67.68.


MASSACHUSETTS, $3,376.82--of which from ESTATES, $900.00.

Andover, "Friends," _for Macon, Ga._, 9.50. Andover, Students Andover
Theo. Sem., 4.45. Ashby, 13.46. Bernardston, Goodale Mem'l, 5.58.
Beverly, Dane Street, Y. P. M. Soc., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington,
N. C._, 10.

Boston, Old South, 100. Boston Mrs. Charlotte M. Fiske, _for
Marshallville, Ga._, 50. Dorchester, Village, 28.73; Pilgrim, S.,
9.69. Dorchester, Second, M. C. Hazard's S. Class, _for Porto Rico_,
4. Jamaica Plain, Central, 3.32. Roxbury, Miss Edith C. Norcross,
bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ West Roxbury, C., Miss'y Band, _for
S. A., Allen N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 4. West Roxbury, Mrs.
Myra P. French, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 4.

Brockton, "A Friend," _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1. Cambridgeport,
First, 136.01; Pilgrim, 10.93. Chelmsford, Central, C. E., 6.50.
Cummington, First, 16.65. Dalton, Mrs. Z. M. Crane, _for Gregory
Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 30. Dalton, E. P. Little, _for Marion,
Ala._, 1. Dunstable, 42.36. East Billerica, D. H. Spiller, 5. East
Northfield, Miss S. E. Holman, bbl. Books, etc., _for Saluda, N. C._
East Walpole, Mrs. A. F. A. Perkins, bbl. Goods and 2, _for Jos. K.
Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._ Everett, Mystic Side C.,
20.58. Framingham, "A Friend," _for Indian M._ (17.50 _for Indian
Sch'p_), 20.50. Georgetown, First, 4.05. Haverhill, Mrs. C. A.
Ransom, 25. Hinsdale, 52. Holyoke, Second, Ladies' Prayer Circle, 5.
Housatonic, 34.88. Lawrence, Trinity, 27.45 Lee, S., 3. Lowell, High
St., 116.40. Lincoln, 105. Lynn, First, 27; Chestnut St., 3.51.
Melrose, Ortho., C., Sewing Circle, two bbls. Goods, _for Jos. K.
Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, Newton, First, 53.95.
Northampton, First C. C., "A Friend," _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington,
N. C._, 20; Edwards C., "Friends," bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N.
C._ North Billerica, Mrs. E. R. Gould, 12. Northbridge Center, First,
12. Norton, Trin. C. C., 15.74; Mrs. E. B. Wheaton, 50. Palmer,
Second, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 25. Peabody, South, 90.
Pittsfield, Mrs. H. A. Campbell, _for Tougaloo U._, 30. Pittsfield,
South, 15.51. Plymouth, Manomet, 8. Reading, 30. Rowley, 14.64.
Salem, Crombie St. C., S., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 2.
Salem, Tab. C., L. B. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Sharon,
20.23. Sheffield, 5.27. Somerville, Prospect Hill C., bbl. Goods,
_for Jos. K. Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._ South
Braintree, Mrs. B. D. Rowlee, _for S. A., Beaufort, N. C._, 4. South
Hadley, Mt. Holyoke College, Faculty, _for Sch'p_, Santee Indian
Sch., Neb., 50. South Lynnfield, C. E., 5. South Hadley, First,
20.25. South Weymouth, Mrs. William Dyer, _for S. A., Allen N. and I.
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 5. Springfield, C. E., by O. S. Houghton,
_for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 16.79. Springfield, First, W.
H. M. S., two bbls. Goods, _for Straight U._ Taunton, Winslow C., L.
B. Soc., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 31.25. Taunton, 22.72. Taunton,
Winslow, S., 10. Taunton, Miss Laura Richards, _for S. A., A. G.
Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 10. Townsend, 4.75. Wakefield, First, 20.50.
Waltham, Mrs. E. R. Cutler, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Ware,
East, 217.47. Ware, Miss Ruth Tucker, _for S. A., Chandler Sch.,
Lexington, Ky._, 3.75. Wareham, First, 15. Wayland, C., C. E., _for
Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 4. Webster, Anna L. Perry, bbl.
Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Wellesley Hills, 8. West Boxford,
First, C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. West Tisbury, 5.80.
Winchester, First, 112.50. Woburn, Social Benevolent Soc., _for
Williamsburg, Ky._, 65 cents. Worcester, Plymouth, Ladies' M. Aux.,
_for Porto Rico_, 22.50. Worcester, Immanuel, 10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., Miss Lizzie
D. White, Treas., $480.00.

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480.

ESTATES.--Medfield, Estate of Mary B. Lovell, 800. Princeton, Estate
of Mrs. Anna H. Whittaker, 100.


RHODE ISLAND, $1,000.00.

----, "In memory of J. G. and M. B. Moffet," through Rev. Frank J,
Goodwin, _for Oklahoma Indian M._, 1,000.


CONNECTICUT, $2,216.21--of which from Estates, $1,000.00.

Bridgeport, Second, Individual Gift, 40. Brookfield, 29.63. Chaplin,
16.50. East Hampton, 16.82. East Hartford, First, 27.67. Fairfield,
128.84. Farmington, "A Friend," 500. Hartford, Park, 30.05.
Harwinton, 17.31. Hebron, First, 12.25. Kent, 9.21. Meriden, Center,
_for Tougaloo U._, ad'l, 25. Morris, 13. New Canaan, C., Jr. C. E.,
_for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 6. New Haven, Center, S., _for S. A.,
Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 17.50. New Haven, Ch. of the Redeemer, S.,
10. New Preston, Mrs. Esther C. Williams, 2. Old Saybrook, 9.95.
Plainfield, C. E., 8.75. Portland, C. E., for Williamsburg, Ky., 2.
Putnam, Second, 27. Rocky Hill, C. E., _for Talladega C._, 20.50.
Roxbury, 7.38. Stratford. Miss Cordelia Sterling, bbl. Goods, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Staffordville, 3. Sound Beach, Pilgrim, Jr. C. E.,
pkg. Patchwork, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ Terryville, 101.75.
Thomaston, 11.42. West Haven, First, 12.97. Wilton, 7.16. Woodbury,
First, 5.22. Windsor Locks, 74.33. Windsor, S., Lincoln Mem., 10.
Winsted, Second, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._
Woodbridge, Mrs. R. C. Newton, _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N.
C._, 2.

----, "A Friend," _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 8.

WOMAN'S CONGREGATIONAL HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs. George
Follett, Sec., $3.00.

Danbury, _for S. A., Williamsburg Acad., Ky._, 2.25. Farmington, 75
cts.

ESTATES.--Norwalk, Estate of William J. Craw, 900. Somers, Estate of
Amanda A. Glover, by W. P. Fuller, Exec'r, 100.


NEW YORK, $3,153.95.

Almeda, J. W. Blish, 5. Angola, Miss A. H. Ames, 5. Auburn, C. E.,
two Comfortables, _for Charleston, S. C._ Brooklyn, Clinton Ave.
Cong. C., (50 of which _for Porto Rico_), 1,070.69. Brooklyn, Mrs.
Julia E. Brick, _for Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N.
C._, 1,000. Brooklyn, Central Cong. Soc., 797.03; Tompkins Ave., M.
C., 4.34; Frederick Condit, two boxes Books, etc. Copenhagen, First,
10.20. Lockport, First, box Goods, _for Talladega C._ Mount Morris,
M. A. Parsons, _for Mountain White Work_, 5. New York, Estate of W.
E. Dodge, _for Theo. S. A., Talladega C._, 250. New York, Lafayette
Post, G. A. R, No. 14, Bunting Flag, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Rochester,
King's D., _for freight to Marion, Ala._, 1.60. Woodville, S., _for
S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 5.


NEW JERSEY, $100.70.

Elizabethport, 7.50. Montclair, First, 25. New Market, M. Band, _for
S. A., Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 6.40. Paterson, Auburn St., S.,
(5 of which _for Mountain Work_), 10. Plainfield, S., (25 of which
_for Marshallville, Ga._), 32.35. Plainfield, Mrs. F. W. Dayton, _for
S. A., Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 9.45.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. G. A. L.
Merrifield, Treas., $10.00.

Bound Brook, 10.


PENNSYLVANIA, $134.92.

Philadelphia, Central, 91.92. Philadelphia, "A Friend," _for Fisk
U._, 25. Philadelphia, C. E. Carr, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 5.
Pittsburg, R. C. Gardner, _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._,
2. West Chester, Sarah S. Kirk, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 10.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENNSYLVANIA, by Mrs. David Howells,
Treas., $1.00.

Spring Creek, 1.


OHIO, $704.21.

Akron, West, 53.75; First, 44.85. Cleveland, "A Friend," _for Fisk
U._, 100. Cleveland, Bethlehem (5.60 of which from S., _for Skyland
Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._), 30.79. Cleveland, Pilgrim, C. E., _for
New Music Books, Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 30. Cleveland, First, S.,
19.39. Cleveland, Mt. Zion C., two bbls. Goods, _for Jos. K. Brick,
A. I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._ Creston, Miss N. L. Knowlton, _for
Singing Books and Tuition, at Beaufort, N. C._, 14.50. Dayton, Miss
F. M. Williams, _for S. A., Allen N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._
3.50. Grafton, 3.75. North Bloomfield, C., 8; "Friends," 10.
Springfield, First, 22.40. Tallmadge, 21.50.

----, Cash, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas.,
$340.78.

Akron, First, 27; First, C. E., 2.50. Akron, West, S., Easter Off.,
7.95; West, Jr. C. E., 1. Alexis, 3. Austinburg, 9. Bellevue 3.50.
Belpre, 2.75. Cincinnati, Walnut Hills, C. E., 3.75. Cincinnati,
Columbia, 2.25. Claridon, 1.50. Cleveland, Euclid Ave., (of which 17
_for Indian M._, 25 _for S. A._), 49. Cleveland, First, 4.32;
Trinity, 6. Columbus, Plymouth, 10. Conneaut, C. E., 5.40. Cortland,
1.50. Fairport Harbor, 2. Fredericksburg, Jr. C. E., 4.50.
Garrettsville, Jr. C. E., 1.50. Geneva, 3.50. Hudson, C. E., 5. Kent,
2.50. Lafayette, 5. Mansfield, Mayflower, 2. Mansfield, First, 45.
Marietta, First, 13. Mount Vernon, 9. North Ridgeville, 2. Oberlin,
First, 5 _for Alaska M._, and 10 _for Indian M._ Oberlin, Second, 13;
Second, C. E., 10. Richmond, 6. Ridgeville Corners, 4. Sandusky, C.
E., 7. Tallmadge, S. L., 20; Jr. C. E., 1.50. Toledo, Central, C. E.,
2.86; Second, 2. Washington St., 4. Wayne, 2.50. Wauseon, 7.50.
Wellington, C. E., _for Talladega C._, 10.


INDIANA, $25.00.

Fort Wayne, 25.


ILLINOIS, $1,063.44--of which from Estate $284.98.

Belvidere, 3.50.

Chicago, Warren Ave., 88.87. Chicago, Mrs. C. H. Case, _for King's
Mountain, N. C._, 10. Chicago, Mrs. Coonley Ward, bbl. Goods, _for
Grand View, Tenn._

Griggsville, Miss Clara Howard, 2. Hinsdale, "Friend," 5.
Jacksonville, 32.07. La Grange, First, 65.61; C. E., 5. Lawn Ridge,
2.45. Moline, First, 105.98. Moline, First, "Coral Workers," _for
Grand View, Tenn._, 5. Oak Park, First, 103.82; Third, 3.50. Payson,
Mrs. Anna C. T. Robbins, to const. MISS EDITH ANNA ROBBINS L.M., 30.
Peoria, C., box Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._ Quincy, First Union,
_for Mountain White Work_, 149.44. Saint Charles, 5.75. Seward,
Winnebago Co., 61.74. Sycamore, 51.12. Sycamore, Mrs. Helen A.
Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Woodstock Mildred and Earl Young,
_for Marion, Ala._, 6.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. Mary S. Booth,
Treas., $36.61.

Chicago, Fellowship, 3.01; Auburn Park, C. E., 2; Covenant, C. E.,
2.50; New Eng., 2.10. Dwight, W. M. S., 8; C. E., 2. Thawville, 5.

Undesignated, 12.

ESTATE.--Rockford, Estate of Almira H. Perry, by Mrs. Mary F.
Penfield Norton, Executrix, 284.98.


MICHIGAN, $331.00--of which from Estate, $270.00.

Detroit, Woodward Ave., Ladies' Union, _for S. A., Brewer, Normal
Sch., Greenwood, S. C._, 20. Detroit, First, L. M. S., _for S. A.,
Grand View, Tenn._, 15; Mrs. Graham, _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._,
15. Prattville, Mrs. Barnes and Mrs. Mackey, four pkgs S. S. Papers.
Saint Clair, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Canned Fruit, _for Orange Park,
Fla._ Sandstone, Union, 4.50; C. E., 50 cts. South Haven, S. Class,
_for Marion, Ala._, 1. Vermontville, Orlin P. Fay, 5. Ypsilanti, C.,
bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for Beaufort N. C._

ESTATE.--Niles, Estate of Dr. James Lewis, 270.


IOWA, $10,195.32.

Algona, King's Daughters, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Anamosa, 11.50.
Cherokee, 17.47. Des Moines, Plymouth 59.50. Iowa City, 12.50. Mason
City, 29.35. McGregor, First, C. E., 15. Onawa, Mary E. Rice, _for S.
A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Stacyville, C., box Goods, _for
Thomasville, Ga._ Webster City, First, C. E., to const. MISS MAY H.
WICKWARE L.M. _for S. A., Talladega C._, 30.

----, "A Christian Brother," 10,000.

----, "A Friend," _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 5.


WISCONSIN, $241.98--of which from Estate, $100.00.

Black Earth, 2.70. Brodhead, Mrs. Lavina McNair, 3. Columbus, 57.
Delevan, S., 4.28. Hartford, two bbls. Goods, and 3.50 _for freight
to Meridian, Miss._ Janesville, S., 10. Menomonie, First, 6.58.
Pittsville, 2.42. Prairie Du Chien, "Cash," _for Alaska M._, 1.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $51.25.

Beloit, First, 37.50. Brandon, 8. Clinton, 5. Milwaukee, Grand Ave.,
75 cents.

ESTATE.--Milwaukee, Estate of Edward D. Holton, by Executors, 100.


MINNESOTA, $297.07.

Atkin, C., 2; S., 1.55. Duluth, Pilgrim, "Friends in Council," 5.
Fairbault, 58.67. Lake Park, 2.71. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 19.44; W.
H. Norris, Quarterly, 10; "Rodelmer," 2.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
Treas., $198.20 (less $3.00 expenses), $195.20.

Duluth, Pilgrim, Mrs. Woodbridge, deceased, 100. Faribault, 2.15.
Lake City, Primary S., 9.50. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 20. Minneapolis,
Mission Band, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 9.30. Minneapolis, First, 5.75;
Lora Hollister, 5. Rochester, 15. Saint Paul, Park, Primary Dept.,
_for S. A., Talladega C._, 26.50. Winona, Mrs. C. F. McLaughlin, 5.


MISSOURI, $55.00.

Meadville, 5. Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg, _for Porto Rico_, 50.


KANSAS, $35.74.

Alma, 5. Carbondale, 2. Kansas City, Pilgrim, 6.04. Manhattan, First,
19.20; Mrs. Mary E. Robinson, Roll Carpet and 2.50, _for Mobile,
Ala._ Neosha Falls, Rev. S. B. Dyckman, 1.


NEBRASKA, $60.48.

Chadron, 7.70. Crete, 33.53. Fremont, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Allen N.
and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 1. Hay Spring, 5. Linwood, 13.25.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $12.00.

Huron, Rev. W. H. Thrall, 5. Mitchell, 3. Sioux Falls, S. Class, _for
S. A., Allen N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 4.


CALIFORNIA, $611.80.

Long Beach, ----, bbl. Goods, _for Lexington, Ky._ Pasadena, First,
10.85. San Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see
items below), 600.95.


OREGON, $4.11.

Forest Grove, 4.11.


WASHINGTON, $4.15.

Snohomish, 4.15.


MARYLAND, $10.00.

Baltimore, Second (5 of which from L. M. Soc.), 10.


KENTUCKY, $1.25.

Williamsburg, C. E., 1.25.


NORTH CAROLINA, $7.25.

Blowing Rock, "Friends," _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 1.50. Greensboro,
Mrs. Moses Cone, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 3. Sanford, 2.75.


TENNESSEE, $87.00.

Grand View, Mary Taylor, _for S. A._, 1.50. Knoxville, Second, C. E.,
_for Knoxville, Tenn._, 50 cts. Nashville, Union C., 75. Nashville,
Fisk University, S., _for Fisk U._, 10.


GEORGIA, $12.50.

McIntosh, Mrs. Agnes N. Warren, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._,
5. Rutland, Day Sch., by E. L. Johnson, 2. Savannah, Rev. J. H. H.
Sengstacke, _for Mountain Work_, 50 cents. Thomasville, Mrs. S. B.
Van Duzer, _for Library Fund, Thomasville, Ga._, 5.


MISSISSIPPI, $5.00.

Tougaloo, Tougaloo U., S., 5.


LOUISIANA, $6.00.

Hammond, 6.


INCOME, $2,092.74.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 333.39. E. A. Brown Sch'p. Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 17.50. De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
Talladega C._, 212. Fisk University Theo. Fund, _for Talladega C._,
1.25. Graves Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 1.25. Hammond Fund, _for
New Orleans, La._, 62.50. Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._,
6.25. Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._, 806.30. LeMoyne Fund, _for
Memphis, Tenn._ 137.50. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 25.
Luke Mem. Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 9. C. B. Rice Mem. Fund,
_for Talladega C._, 3.40. Sch'p Fund, _for Straight U._, 18. Seymour
Straight Endowment Fund, _for Straight U._, 52.70. Stone Sch'p Fund,
_for Talladega C._, 22.50. Straight U. Sch'p Fund, 40. Tuthill King
Endowment Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 105. Tuthill King End. Fund, _for
Berea C._, 83.75. S. Wadhams Theo. Fund, _for Talladega C._, 25. C.
Ward End. Fund, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 6.70.


TUITION, $4,547.10.

Cappahosic, Va., 52.88. Lexington, Ky., 361.50. Williamsburg, Ky.,
63.85. Beaufort, N. C., 35.89. Blowing Rock, N. C., 27.02. Chapel
Hill, N. C., 6.70. Enfield, N. C., 24.65. Hillsboro, N. C., 26.91.
King's Mountain, N. C., 30. Saluda, N. C., 35.45. Troy, N. C., 2.78.
Whittier, N. C., 18.35. Wilmington, N. C., 100.10. Charleston, S C.,
274.55. Greenwood, S. C., 110.75. Grand View, Tenn., 23, Knoxville,
Tenn., 63.30. Memphis, Tenn., 594.25. Nashville, Tenn., 596.26.
Andersonville, Ga., 10.25. Atlanta, Ga., 250.57. Macon, Ga., 320.64
McIntosh, Ga., 127.29. Marshallville, Ga., Public Fund, 20.
Thomasville, Ga., 107.32. Marion, Ala., 60. Mobile, Ala., 140.75.
Talladega, Ala., 182.40. Meridian, Miss., 99.75. Moorhead, Miss.,
42.15. Tougaloo, Miss., 53.97. New Orleans, La., 511.94. Helena,
Ark., 56.60. Orange Park, Fla., 50.43. Austin, Tex., 64.85.


SUMMARY FOR JUNE 1900.

  Donations                                            $22,433.49
  Estates                                                2,554.98
                                                      -----------
                                                       $24,988.47
  Income                                                 2,092.74
  Tuition                                                4,547.10
                                                      -----------
  Total for June                                       $31,628.31


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for June                                    $9.35
  Previously acknowledged                                  264.24
                                                         --------
  Total                                                    273.59


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                           $137,047.04
  Estates                                               49,632.27
                                                     ------------
                                                      $186,679.31
  Income                                                10,541.79
  Tuition                                               39,920.15
                                                     ------------
  Total from Oct. 1, '99 to June 30, 1900             $237,141.25


ENDOWMENT FUND.

  Estate of Seymour Straight, late of Hudson, Ohio,
  _for Straight University, New Orleans, La_.,
  $528.50 (less expenses, 174.40)                         $354.10


RESERVE LEGACY ACCOUNT.

  From Oct. 1, 1899, to June 30, 1900                  $69,242.07


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from May 15 to June 15,
1900, William Johnstone, Treas., $600.95.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $302.15:

Berkeley, Chinese M. O., 5.40. Fresno, Chinese M. O., 3.35; Ann'y
Pledges, 2.50. Fruitland, Chinese M. O., 4.15; Vernon, C., 2.15. Los
Angeles, Chinese M. O., 4.85; Ann'y Off's, 68. Marysville, Chinese M.
O., 7.50; Ann'y Off's, 17.30. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 5.30; First C.,
Y. P. S. C. E., 25. Oroville, Chinese M. O., 2.75; Ann'y Off's, 28.
Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 2.10; Ann'y Off's, 12. Petaluma, Chinese M.
O., 1. Riverside, Chinese M. O., 3.55; Ann'y Off's, 10. Sacramento,
Chinese M. O., 4. San Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 2; Ann'y Off's 5.
San Diego, Chinese M. O., 2.05; Ann'y Pledges, 12.50. San Francisco,
Central "New Year's Gifts to Jesus," 6.90. San Francisco, West,
Chinese M. O., 3; Annual Members, 8. San Francisco, S. F. Branch
Ass'n, _for Sch. for Instruction in Chinese_, 10. San Francisco,
Bethany C., Ann'y Off's 7. Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O., 4.95; Ann'y
Off's, 4. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 6.50; Ann'y Off's, 14.95.
Ventura, Chinese M. O., 2.40; Ann'y Off's, 4.

CHURCHES, $1.00:

Santa Rosa, C., Kingdom Extension Soc., 1.

INDIVIDUAL OFF'S, $70.00:

Mrs. A. C. Heisen, 40; Mrs. N. Stevenson, 30.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $105.00:

Belfast, Me., Miss E. M. Pond, 5. New Haven, Conn., Mrs. Henry
Farnum, 100.

FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $122.80:

Cal. W. H. M. U. of Northern and Central California, 122.80.


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Ave. and Twenty-Second St.,
  New York, N. Y.

         *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.

  President--Mrs. Geo. F. Peaslee, 42 Goff St., Auburn.
  Secretary--Mrs. S. W. Chapin, Deer Isle.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Helen W. Davis, Woodfords.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT. INST'N AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. D. Knapp, Somersworth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 3 Liberty St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. L. Smith, Burlington.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Robert Mackinnon, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 107 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Lizzie D. White, 107 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Miss Anne W. Moore, 15 Columbia Street, Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Av., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 513 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 153 Decatur St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Clark, Fourth and College Sts., N. W.,
    Washington, D. C.
  Secretary, Miss Julia M. Pond, 607 T St., N. E., Washington, D. C.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. A. L. Merryfield, Falls Church, Va.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Wilcox.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Waid, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. David Howells, Kane.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. W. Carroll, 48 Brookfield St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Arra H. Williams, 46 Knox St., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

  President--Mrs. M. L. Paine, Elkhart.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. A. Waterman, Terre Haute.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Anna D. Davis, 1608 Bellefontaine St., Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Oak Park.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Whitcomb, 463 Irving Ave., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary S. Booth, 34 S. Wood St., Chicago. Ill.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. H. Patton, 3707 Westminster Place, St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. S. Cobb, 4415 W. Morgan St., St. Louis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. J. Steele, 2825 Washington Ave., St. Louis.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, West Grand Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Platt Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. N. Thorne, 212 S. Union St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. E. Smith, 140 Gorham St., Madison.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 E. 9th St., St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. R. Shepard, 2931 Portland Ave., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. H. Stickney, Fargo.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. M. Jenney, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. M. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Brown, Rapid City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S. Cushman, Deadwood.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Q St., Lincoln
  Treasurer--Mrs. Charlotte C. Hall, 1318 C St., Lincoln.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Guild, 1336 Dillon St., Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. H. Jaquith, Cripple Creek, Col.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Wilkinson, Ottawa.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Dr. E. F. A. Drake, 518 Mack Block, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Addison Blanchard, 3023 Downing Ave., Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. N. Thomas, Eaton.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  Acting President--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. L. Whipple, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Kevan, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Victor F. Clark, Livingston.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Mrs. W. S. Bell, Helena.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. E. Mason, Mountain Home.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Johnston, Challis.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 So. K St., Tacoma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Herbert S. Gregory, Spanaway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. B. Burwell, 323 Seventh Ave., Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hobart-Curtis, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. D. Clarke, 447 N. E. Twelfth St., Portland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Forest Grove.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, Saratoga.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 1383 Franklin St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 949 S. Hill St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. G. Robertson, Mentone.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. T. Hemphill, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Hall, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Miss Anna Baker, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. H. Ashmun, Albuquerque
  Secretary--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. McCluskey, Albuquerque


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. Faduma, Troy.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss May E. Newton, King's Mountain.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Mertie L. Graham, Savannah
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Curtis, McIntosh.
  Treasurer--Miss Mattie Turner, Athens.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Spencer Snell, Talladega.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENN., KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. E. Smith, Chattanooga, Tenn.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. C. Napier, 514 Capitol Square, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th St., Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, 2436 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda W. Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary L. Rogers, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Eunice Heflin, Sherman.
  Secretary--Mrs. Donald Hinckley, Sanger Ave., Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Arthur Geen, Dallas.


[Footnote A: While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S WORK.

  VERMONT             Mrs. W. B. Ranney, Newport.

  MASS. & R. I.       Miss Bertha M. Shepard, 607 Cong'l House, Boston.

  NEW YORK            Mrs. H. A. Flint, 604 Willis Ave., Syracuse.

  OHIO                Miss M. C. Smith, 853 Doan St., Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS            Mrs. J. T. Blanchard, 218 Walnut St., Aurora.

  MISSOURI            Miss Katherine Jones, 4337 Washington Ave.,
                        St. Louis.

  IOWA                Mrs. Charles McAllister, Spencer.

  MICHIGAN            Mrs. W. J. Gregory, 459 Third St., Manistee.

  MINNESOTA, Young Ladies' Work, Mrs. B. W. Smith, 600 West
                         Thirty-second St., Minneapolis.

  MINNESOTA, Christian Endeavor Work, Miss Bertha Hanneman, 1816
                         Portland Ave., Minneapolis.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. E. S. Shaw, Cooperstown.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. Grace Burleigh, Mitchell.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. J. N. Hyder, 1520 U St., Lincoln.

  KANSAS               Mrs. C. E. Read, Parsons.

  COLORADO             Mrs. Olive R. Barker, Greeley.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. C. Arnold, 621 Spruce St., Helena.

  WASHINGTON           Mrs. W. C. Davie, 423 North N St., Tacoma.

  OREGON               Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 443 West Park St., Portland.

  CALIFORNIA           Miss Caroline A. Potter, 600 17th St., Oakland.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Phebe Mayhew, 355 Alvarado St., Los Angeles.


SECRETARIES OF CHILDREN'S WORK.

  OHIO                 Mrs. Effie Morgan, 3880 Euclid Ave., East Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS             Miss Hattie Kline, 713 E. 63rd St., Chicago.

  IOWA                 Mrs. M. Rew, Grinnell.

  MICHIGAN             Mrs. C. R. Wilson, 65 Frederick Ave., Detroit.

  MINNESOTA            Mrs. H. S. Baker, 2268 Blake Ave., St. Anthony Park.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. O. J. Wakefield, Wahpeton.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. I. Crane, Waubay.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. H. D. Neely, 4371 Hamilton St., Omaha.

  KANSAS               Miss Hattie Booth, Newton.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. B. Segur, Billings.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Emily M. Peck, 920 W. 8th St., Los Angeles.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Volume 54,
No. 3, July, 1900, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY, JULY, 1900 ***

***** This file should be named 28541-8.txt or 28541-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/5/4/28541/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
