The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Nettie, by 
Susan Bogert Warner and Anna Bartlett Warner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Little Nettie
       or, Home Sunshine

Author: Susan Bogert Warner
        Anna Bartlett Warner

Release Date: April 27, 2011 [EBook #35983]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE NETTIE ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  LITTLE NETTIE.

  [Illustration: MR. MATHIESON STALKED OUT OF THE HOUSE AND STRODE
                 ALONG THE ROAD.]




  LITTLE NETTIE;

  OR,
  HOME SUNSHINE.


  BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE WIDE, WIDE WORLD,"
  ETC., ETC.


  LONDON:
  FREDERICK WARNE & CO.
  AND NEW YORK.




  CONTENTS.

  CHAPTER                                  PAGE

     I.--_Saturday Evening's Work_           5

    II.--_Sunday's Rest_                    23

   III.--_Nettie's Garret_                  57

    IV.--_The Brown Cloak in November_      67

     V.--_The New Blanket_                  77

    VI.--_The House-Raising_                88

   VII.--_The Waffles_                      97

  VIII.--_The Golden City_                 115




LITTLE NETTIE;

OR,

HOME SUNSHINE.




CHAPTER I.

_SATURDAY EVENING'S WORK._

  "Tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother."--
                                        _Prov._ iv. 3.


Down in a little hollow, with the sides grown full of wild thorn, alder
bushes, and stunted cedars, ran the stream of a clear spring. It ran
over a bed of pebbly stones, showing every one, as if there had been no
water there, so clear it was; and it ran with a sweet soft murmur or
gurgle over the stones, as if singing to itself and the bushes as it
ran.

On one side of the little stream a worn footpath took its course among
the bushes; and down this path, one summer's afternoon, came a woman
and a girl. They had pails to fill at the spring: the woman had a large
wooden one and the girl a light tin pail; and they drew the water with
a little tin dipper, for it was not deep enough to let a pail be used
for that. The pails were filled in silence, only the spring always was
singing; and the woman and girl turned and went up the path again.
After getting up the bank, which was only a few feet, the path still
went gently rising through a wild bit of ground, full of trees and low
bushes; and not far off, through the trees, there came a gleam of bright
light from the window of a house on which the setting sun was shining.
Half-way to the house the girl and the woman stopped to rest; for water
is heavy, and the tin pail, which was so light before it was filled, had
made the little girl's figure bend over to one side like a willow branch
all the way from the spring. They stopped to rest, and even the woman
had a very weary, jaded look.

"I feel as if I shall give up some of these days," she exclaimed.

"Oh, no, mother!" the little girl answered, cheerfully. She was panting,
with her hand on her side, and her face had a quiet, very sober look;
only at those words a little pleasant smile broke over it.

"I shall," said the woman. "One can't stand everything,--for ever."

The little girl had not got over panting yet, but standing there, she
struck up the sweet air and words,--

  "'There is rest for the weary,
    There is rest for the weary,
    There is rest for the weary,
      There is rest for you.'"

"Yes, in the grave!" said the woman bitterly. "There's no rest short of
that--for mind or body."

"Oh, yes, mother dear. 'For we which have believed do enter into rest.'
The Lord Jesus don't make us wait."

"I believe you eat the Bible and sleep on the Bible," said the woman,
with a faint smile, taking at the same time a corner of her apron to
wipe away a stray tear which had gathered in her eye. "I am glad it
rests you, Nettie."

"And you, mother."

"Sometimes," Mrs. Mathieson answered with a sigh. "But there's your
father going to bring home a boarder, Nettie."

"A boarder, mother!--What for?"

"Heaven knows!--if it isn't to break my back and my heart together. I
thought I had enough to manage before, but here's this man coming, and
I've got to get everything ready for him by to-morrow night."

"Who is it, mother?"

"It's one of your father's friends; so it's no good," said Mrs.
Mathieson.

"But where can he sleep?" Nettie asked, after a moment of thinking.

Her mother paused.

"There's no room but yours he can have. Barry won't be moved."

"Where shall I sleep, mother?"

"There's no place but up in the attic. I'll see what I can do to fit up
a corner for you--if I ever can get time," said Mrs. Mathieson, taking
up her pail. Nettie followed her example, and certainly did not smile
again till they reached the house. They went round to the front door,
because the back door belonged to another family. At the door, as they
set down their pails again before mounting the stairs, Nettie smiled at
her mother very placidly, and said,

"Don't you go to fit up the attic, mother; I'll see to it in time. I can
do it just as well."

Mrs. Mathieson made no answer, but groaned internally, and they went up
the flight of steps which led to their part of the house. The ground
floor was occupied by somebody else. A little entry-way received the
wooden pail of water, and with the tin one Nettie went into the room
used by the family. It was her father and mother's sleeping-room, their
bed standing in one corner. It was the kitchen apparently, for a small
cooking-stove was there, on which Nettie put the tea-kettle when she
had filled it. And it was the common living-room also; for the next
thing she did was to open a cupboard and take out cups and saucers,
and arrange them on a leaf table which stood toward one end of the room.
The furniture was wooden and plain; the woodwork of the windows was
unpainted; the cups and plates were of the commonest kind; and the floor
had no covering but two strips of rag carpeting; nevertheless the whole
was tidy and very clean, showing constant care. Mrs. Mathieson had sunk
into a chair as one who had no spirit to do anything, and watched her
little daughter setting the table with eyes which seemed not to see her.
They gazed inwardly at something she was thinking of.

"Mother, what is there for supper?"

"There is nothing. I must make some porridge." And Mrs. Mathieson got up
from her chair.

"Sit you still, mother, and I'll make it. I can."

"If both our backs are to be broken," said Mrs. Mathieson, "I'd rather
mine would break first." And she went on with her preparations.

"But you don't like porridge," said Nettie. "You didn't eat anything
last night."

"That's nothing, child. I can bear an empty stomach, if only my brain
wasn't quite so full."

Nettie drew near the stove and looked on, a little sorrowfully.

"I wish you had something you liked, mother! If only I was a little
older, wouldn't it be nice? I could earn something then, and I would
bring you home things that you liked out of my own money."

This was not said sorrowfully, but with a bright gleam as of some
fancied and pleasant possibility. The gleam was so catching, Mrs.
Mathieson turned from her porridge-pot, which she was stirring, to give
a very heartfelt kiss to Nettie's lips; then she stirred on, and the
shadow came over her face again.

"Dear," she said, "just go in Barry's room and straighten it up a little
before he comes in--will you? I haven't had a minute to do it, all day;
and there won't be a bit of peace if he comes in and it isn't in order."

Nettie turned and opened another door, which let her into a small
chamber used as somebody's bed-room. It was all brown like the other,
a strip of the same carpet in the middle of the floor, and a small
cheap chest of drawers, and a table. The bed had not been made up, and
the tossed condition of the bed-clothes spoke for the strength and
energy of the person that used them, whoever he was. A pair of coarse
shoes were in the middle of the whole; another pair, or rather a
pair of half-boots, out at the toes, were in the middle of the floor;
stockings,--one under the bed and one under the table. On the table was
a heap of confusion; and on the little bureau were to be seen pieces
of wood, half-cut and uncut, with shavings, and the knife and saw that
had made them. Old newspapers, and school-books, and a slate, and two
kites, with no end of tails, were lying over every part of the room that
happened to be convenient; also an ink-bottle and pens, with chalk and
resin and a medley of unimaginable things beside, that only boys can
collect together and find delight in. If Nettie sighed as all this
hurly-burly met her eye, it was only an internal sigh. She set about
patiently bringing things to order. First she made the bed, which it
took all her strength to do, for the coverlets were of a very heavy
and coarse manufacture of cotton and woollen mixed, blue and white; and
then gradually she found a way to bestow the various articles in Barry's
apartment, so that things looked neat and comfortable. But perhaps it
was a little bit of a sign of Nettie's feelings, that she began softly
to sing to herself,--

  "'There is rest for the weary.'"

"Hallo!" burst in a rude boy of some fifteen years, opening the door
from the entry,--"who's puttin' my room to rights?"

A very gentle voice said, "I've done it, Barry."

"What have you done with that pine log?"

"Here it is,--in the corner behind the bureau."

"Don't you touch it, now, to take it for your fire,--mind, Nettie!
Where's my kite?"

"You won't have time to fly it now, Barry; supper will be ready in two
minutes."

"What have you got?"

"The same kind we had last night."

"_I_ don't care for supper." Barry was getting the tail of his kite
together.

"But please, Barry, come now; because it will give mother so much more
trouble if you don't. She has the things to clear away after you're
done, you know."

"Trouble! so much talk about trouble! _I_ don't mind trouble. I don't
want any supper, I tell you."

Nettie knew well enough he would want it by-and-bye, but there was no
use in saying anything more, and she said nothing. Barry got his kite
together and went off. Then came a heavier step on the stairs, which
she knew; and she hastily went into the other room to see that all was
ready. The tea was made, and Mrs. Mathieson put the smoking dish of
porridge on the table, just as the door opened and a man came in--a
tall, burly, strong man, with a face that would have been a good face
enough if its expression had been different and if its hue had not been
that of a purplish-red flush. He came to the table and silently sat down
as he took a survey of what was on it.

"Give me a cup of tea! Have you got no bread, Sophia?"

"Nothing but what you see. I hoped you would bring home some money, Mr.
Mathieson. I have neither milk nor bread; it's a mercy there's sugar. I
don't know what you expect a lodger to live on."

"Live on his board,--that'll give you enough. But you want something to
begin with. I'd go out and get one or two things--but I'm so confoundedly
tired, I can't."

Mrs. Mathieson, without a word, put on a shawl and went to the closet
for her bonnet.

"I'll go, mother! Let me go, please. I want to go," exclaimed Nettie,
eagerly. "I can get it. What shall I get, father?"

Slowly and weariedly the mother laid off her things; as quickly the
child put hers on.

"What shall I get, father?"

"Well, you can go down the street to Jackson's, and get what your mother
wants: some milk and bread; and then you'd better fetch seven pounds of
meal and a quart of treacle. And ask him to give you a nice piece of
pork out of his barrel."

"She can't bring all that!" exclaimed the mother; "you'd better go
yourself, Mr. Mathieson. That would be a great deal more than the child
can carry, or I either."

"Then I'll go twice, mother: it isn't far; I'd like to go. I'll get it.
Please give me the money, father."

He cursed and swore at her for answer. "Go along, and do as you are bid,
without all this chaffering! Go to Jackson's, and tell him you want the
things, and I'll give him the money to-morrow. He knows me."

Nettie knew he did, and stood her ground.

Her father was just enough in liquor to be a little thick-headed and
foolish.

"You know I can't go without the money, father," she said, gently; "and
to-morrow is Sunday."

He cursed Sunday and swore again, but finally put his hand in his pocket
and threw some money across the table to her. He was just in a state not
to be careful what he did, and he threw her crown-pieces where, if he
had been quite himself, he would have given shillings. Nettie took them
without any remark, and her basket, and went out.

It was just sundown. The village lay glittering in the light that would
be gone in a few minutes; and up on the hill the white church, standing
high, showed all bright in the sun-beams, from its sparkling vane at the
top of the spire down to the lowest step at the door. Nettie's home was
in a branch road, a few steps from the main street of the village, that
led up to the church at one end of it. All along that street the sunlight
lay, on the grass, and the roadway, and the side-walks, and the tops of
a few elm trees. The street was empty; it was most people's supper-time.
Nettie turned the corner and went down the village. She went slowly: her
little feet were already tired with the work they had done that day, and
back and arms and head all seemed tired too. But Nettie never thought it
hard that her mother did not go instead of letting her go; she knew her
mother could not bear to be seen in the village in the old shabby gown
and shawl she wore; for Mrs. Mathieson had seen better days. And besides
that, she would be busy enough as it was, and till a late hour, this
Saturday night. Nettie's gown was shabby too--yes, very shabby, compared
with that almost every other child in the village wore; yet somehow
Nettie was not ashamed. She did not think of it now, as her slow steps
took her down the village street; she was thinking what she should do
about the money. Her father had given her two or three times as much,
she knew, as he meant her to spend; he was a good workman, and had just
got in his week's wages. What should Nettie do? Might she keep and give
to her mother what was over? it was, and would be, so much wanted! and
from her father they could never get it again. He had his own ways of
disposing of what he earned, and very little indeed went to the wants of
his wife and daughter. What might Nettie do! She pondered, swinging her
basket in her hand, till she reached a corner where the village street
turned off again, and where the store of Mr. Jackson stood. There she
found Barry bargaining for some things he at least had money for.

"Oh, Barry, how good!" exclaimed Nettie; "you can help me carry my
things home."

"I'll know the reason first, though," answered Barry. "What are you
going to get?"

"Father wants a bag of corn-meal, and a piece of pork, and some treacle;
and you know I can't carry them all, Barry. I've got to get bread and
milk besides."

"Hurrah!" said Barry; "now we'll have fried cakes! I'll tell you what
I'll do, Nettie--I'll take home the treacle, if you'll make me some
to-night for supper."

"Oh, I can't, Barry! I've got so much else to do, and it's Saturday
night."

"Very good--get your things home yourself, then."

Barry turned away, and Nettie made her bargains. He still stood by,
however, and watched her. When the pork and the meal and the treacle
were bestowed in the basket, it was so heavy she could not manage to
carry it. How many journeys to and fro would it cost her?

"Barry," she said, "you take this home for me, and if mother says so,
I'll make you the cakes."

"Be quick, then," said her brother, shouldering the basket, "for I'm
getting hungry."

Nettie went a few steps farther on the main road of the village, which
was little besides one long street, and not very long either, and went
in at the door of a very little dwelling, neat and tidy like all the
rest. It admitted her to the tiniest morsel of a shop--at least there
was a long table there which seemed to do duty as a counter; and
before, not behind it, sat a spruce little woman sewing. She jumped up
as Nettie entered. By the becoming smartness of her calico dress and
white collar, the beautiful order of her hair, and a certain peculiarity
of feature, you might know before she spoke that the little baker was a
Frenchwoman. She spoke English quite well, but rather slowly.

"I want two loaves of bread, Mrs. August, and a pint of milk, if you
please."

"How will you carry them, my child? you cannot take them all at the
time."

"Oh yes, I can," said Nettie, cheerfully. "I can manage. They are not
heavy."

"No, I hope not," said the Frenchwoman; "it is not heavy, my bread! but
two loaves are not one, no more. Is your mother well?"

She then set busily about wrapping the loaves in paper and measuring out
the milk. Nettie answered, her mother was well.

"And you?" said the little woman, looking at her sideways. "Somebody is
tired this evening."

"Yes," said Nettie, brightly; "but I don't mind. One must be tired
sometimes. Thank you, ma'am."

The woman had put the loaves and the milk carefully in her arms and in
her hands, so that she could carry them, and looked after her as she
went up the street.

"One must be tired sometimes!" said she to herself, with a turn of her
capable little head. "I should like to hear her say 'One must be rested
sometimes;' but I do not hear that."

So perhaps Nettie thought, as she went homeward. It would have been very
natural. Now the sun was down, the bright gleam was off the village; the
soft shades of evening were gathering, and lights twinkled in windows.
Nettie walked very slowly, her arms full of the bread. Perhaps she
wished her Saturday's work was all done, like other people's. All I can
tell you is, that as she went along through the quiet deserted street,
all alone, she broke out softly singing to herself the words,--

  "No need of the sun in that day
  Which never is followed by night;"

and that when she got home she ran upstairs quite briskly, and came in
with a very placid face, and told her mother she had had a pleasant
walk--which was perfectly true.

"God bless you, child!" said her mother; "you are the very rose of my
heart!"

There was only time for this little dialogue, for which Mr. Mathieson's
slumbers had given a chance. But then Barry entered, and noisily claimed
Nettie's promise. And without a cloud crossing her sweet brow, she made
the cakes, and baked them on the stove, and served Barry until he had
enough; nor ever said how weary she was of being on her feet. There were
more cakes left, and Mrs. Mathieson saw to it that Nettie sat down and
ate them; and then sent her off to bed, without suffering her to do
anything more; though Nettie pleaded to be allowed to clear away the
dishes. Mrs. Mathieson did that, and then sat down to darns and patches
on various articles of clothing, till the old clock of the church on the
hill tolled out solemnly the hour of twelve all over the village.




CHAPTER II.

_SUNDAY'S REST._

  "This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice
  and be glad in it."--_Psalm_ cxviii, 24.


Nettie's room was the only room on that floor besides her mother's and
Barry's. It was at the back of the house, with a pleasant look-out over
the trees and bushes between it and the spring. Over these the view went
to distant hills and fields, that always looked pretty in all sorts of
lights, Nettie thought. Besides that, it was a clean, neat little room;
bare, to be sure, without even Barry's strip of rag carpet; but on a
little black table lay Nettie's Bible and Sunday-school books; and each
window had a chair; and a chest of drawers held all her little wardrobe
and a great deal of room to spare besides; and the cot-bed in one
corner was nicely made up. It was a very comfortable-looking room to
Nettie.

"So this is the last night I shall sleep here!" she thought as she went
in. "To-morrow I must go up to the attic. Well, I can pray there just
the same; and God will be with me there just the same."

It was a comfort; but it was the only one Nettie could think of in
connection with her removal. The attic was no room, but only a little
garret used as a lumber-place; not boarded up nor plastered at all;
nothing but the beams and the side boarding for the walls, and nothing
but the rafters and the shingles between it and the sky. Besides which,
it was full of lumber of one sort and another. How Nettie was to move up
there the next day, being Sunday, she could not imagine; but she was so
tired that as soon as her head touched her pillow she fell asleep, and
forgot to think about it.

The next thing was the bright morning light rousing her, and the joyful
thought that it was Sunday morning. A beautiful day it was. The eastern
light was shining over upon Nettie's distant hills with all sorts of
fresh, lovely colours, and promise of what the coming hours would bring.
Nettie looked at them lovingly, for she was very fond of them, and had a
great many thoughts about those hills. "As the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about His people;"--that was one thing
they made her think of. She thought of it now as she was dressing, and
it gave her the feeling of being surrounded with a mighty and strong
protection on every side. It made Nettie's heart curiously glad, and her
tongue speak joyful things; for when she knelt down to pray she was full
of thanksgiving.

The next thing was that, taking her tin pail, Nettie set off down to the
spring to get water to boil her kettle. It was so sweet and pleasant--no
other spring could supply nicer water. The dew brushed from the bushes
and grass as she went by; and from every green thing there went up a
fresh dewy smell, that was reviving. The breath of the summer wind,
moving gently, touched her cheek and fluttered her hair, and said God
had given a beautiful day to the world; and Nettie thanked Him in her
heart, and went on rejoicing. Sunday was Nettie's holiday, and Sunday
school and church were her delight. And though she went in all weathers,
and nothing would keep her, yet sunshine is sunshine, and she felt so
this morning. So she gaily filled her pail at the spring and trudged
back with it to the house. The next thing was to tap at her mother's
door.

Mrs. Mathieson opened it, in her night-gown; she was just up, and looked
as if her night's sleep had been all too short for her.

"Why, Nettie! is it late?" she said, as Nettie and the tin pail came in.

"No, mother; it's just good time. You get dressed, and I'll make the
fire ready. It's beautiful out, mother!"

Mrs. Mathieson made no answer, and Nettie went to work with the fire.
It was an easy matter to put in some paper and kindle the light wood;
and when the kettle was on, Nettie went round the room, softly setting
it to rights as well as she could; then glanced at her father, still
sleeping.

"I can't set the table yet, mother."

"No, child; go off, and I'll see to the rest.--If I can get folks up, at
least," said Mrs. Mathieson, somewhat despondingly.

Sunday morning that was a doubtful business, she and Nettie knew. Nettie
went to her own room to carry out a plan she had. If she could manage
to get her things conveyed up to the attic without her mother knowing
it, just so much labour and trouble would be spared her, and her mother
might have a better chance of some rest that day. Little enough, with a
lodger coming that evening! To get her things up there,--that was all
Nettie would do to-day; but that must be done. The steep stairs to the
attic went up from the entry-way, just outside of Nettie's door. She
went up the first time to see what room there was to bestow anything.

The little garret was strewn all over with things carelessly thrown in
merely to get them out of the way. There was a small shutter window in
each gable. One was open, just revealing the utter confusion, but half
showing the dust that lay on everything. The other window, the back
one, was fairly shut up by a great heap of boxes and barrels piled
against it. In no part was there a clear space or a hopeful opening.
Nettie stood aghast for some moments, not knowing what to do. "But if
I don't, mother will have to do it," she thought. It nerved her little
arm, and one thought of her invisible Protector nerved her heart, which
had sunk at first coming up. Softly she moved and began her operations,
lest her mother downstairs should hear and find out what she was about
before it was done. Sunday too! But there was no help for it.

Notwithstanding the pile of boxes, she resolved to begin at the end with
the closed window; for near the other there were things she could not
move: an old stove, a wheelbarrow, a box of heavy iron tools, and some
bags of charcoal, and other matters. By a little pushing and coaxing,
Nettie made a place for the boxes, and then began her task of removing
them. One by one, painfully, for some were unwieldy and some were
weighty, they travelled across in Nettie's arms, or were shoved and
turned over and across the floor, from the window to a snug position
under the eaves, where she stowed them. Barry would have been a good
hand at this business, not to speak of his father; but Nettie knew there
was no help to be expected from either of them, and the very thought of
them did not come into her head. Mr. Mathieson, provided he worked at
his trade, thought the "women folks" might look after the house; Barry
considered that when he had got through the heavy labours of school,
he had done his part of the world's work. So Nettie toiled on with her
boxes and barrels. They scratched her arms; they covered her clean face
with dust; they tried her strength; but every effort saved one to her
mother, and Nettie never stopped except to gather breath and rest.

The last thing of all under the window was a great old chest. Nettie
could not move it, and she thought it might stay there very conveniently
for a seat. All the rest of the pile she cleared away, and then opened
the window. There was no sash--nothing but a wooden shutter fastened
with a hook. Nettie threw it open. There, to her great joy, behold, she
had the very same view of her hills, all shining in the sun now. Only
this window was higher than her old one and lifted her up more above the
tops of the trees, and gave a better and clearer and wider view of the
distant open country she liked so much. Nettie was greatly delighted,
and refreshed herself with a good look out and a breath of fresh air
before she began her labours again. That gave the dust a little chance
to settle too.

There was a good deal to do yet before she could have a place clear for
her bed, not to speak of anything more. However, it was done at last,
the floor brushed up, all ready, and the top of the chest wiped clean;
and next Nettie set about bringing all her things up the stairs and
setting them here, where she could. Her clothes, her little bit of a
looking-glass, her Bible and books and slate, even her little washstand,
she managed to lug up to the attic, with many a journey and much pains.
But it was about done before her mother called her to breakfast. The two
lagging members of the family had been roused at last, and were seated
at the table.

"Why, what have you been doing, child? how you look!" said Mrs.
Mathieson.

"How do I look?" said Nettie.

"Queer enough," said her father.

Nettie laughed, and hastened to another subject: she knew if they got
upon this there would be some disagreeable words before it was over. She
had made up her mind what to do, and now handed her father the money
remaining from her purchases.

"You gave me too much, father, last night," she said, simply; "here is
the rest."

Mr. Mathieson took it and looked at it.

"Did I give you all this?"

"Yes, father."

"Did you pay for what you got, besides?"

"Yes."

He muttered something which was very like an oath in his throat, and
looked at his little daughter, who was quietly eating her breakfast.
Something touched him unwontedly.

"You're an honest little girl," he said. "There! you may have that for
yourself." And he tossed her a shilling.

You could see, by a little streak of pink colour down each of Nettie's
cheeks, that some great thought of pleasure had started into her mind.
"For myself, father?" she repeated.

"All for yourself," said Mr. Mathieson, buttoning up his money with a
very satisfied air.

Nettie said no more, only ate her breakfast a little quicker after that.
It was time, too; for the late hours of some of the family always made
her in a hurry about getting to Sunday school; and the minute Nettie
had done, she got her bonnet--her Sunday bonnet--the best she had to
wear--and set off. Mrs. Mathieson never let her wait for anything at
home _that_ morning.

This was Nettie's happy time. It never troubled her that she had nothing
but a sun-bonnet of white muslin, nicely starched and ironed, while
almost all the other girls that came to the school had little straw
bonnets trimmed with blue and pink, and yellow and green ribbons; and
some of them wore silk bonnets. Nettie did not even think of it; she
loved her Sunday lesson, and her Bible, and her teacher, so much; and it
was such a pleasant time when she went to enjoy them all together. It
was only a little way she had to go, for the road where Mrs. Mathieson
lived, after running down a little farther from the village, met another
road which turned right up the hill to the church; or Nettie could
take the other way, to the main village street, and straight up that.
Generally she chose the forked way, because it was the emptiest.

Nettie's class in the Sunday school was of ten little girls about her
own age; and their teacher was a very pleasant and kind gentleman,
named Mr. Folke. Nettie loved him dearly; she would do anything that Mr.
Folke told her to do. Their teacher was very apt to give the children a
question to answer from the Bible, for which they had to look out texts
during the week. This week the question was, "Who are happy?" and Nettie
was very eager to know what answers the other girls would bring. She
was in good time, and sat resting and watching the boys and girls and
teachers as they came in, before the school began. She was first there
of all her class; and she watched so eagerly to see those who were
coming, that she did not know Mr. Folke was near till he spoke to her.
Nettie started and turned.

"How do you do?" said her teacher, kindly. "Are you quite well, Nettie,
this morning?" For he thought she looked pale and tired. But her face
coloured with pleasure, and a smile shone all over it, as she told him
she was very well.

"Have you found out who are the happy people, Nettie?"

"Yes, Mr. Folke; I have found a verse. But I knew before."

"I thought you did. Who are they, Nettie?"

"Those who love Jesus, sir."

"Ay. In the Christian armour, you know, the feet are 'shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace.' With the love of Jesus in our
hearts, our feet can go over rough ways and hardly feel that they are
rough. Do you find it so?"

"Oh yes, sir!"

He said no more, for others of the class now came up; and Nettie
wondered how he knew, or if he knew, that she had a rough way to go
over. But his words were a help and comfort to her. So was the whole
lesson that day. The verses about the happy people were beautiful. The
seven girls who sat on one side of Nettie repeated the blessings told
of in the fifth chapter of St. Matthew, about the poor in spirit, the
mourners, the meek, those that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
the merciful, the pure in heart, and the peacemakers. Then came Nettie's
verse. It was this:

"Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in
the Lord his God."

The next girl gave the words of Jesus, "If ye know these things, happy
are ye if ye do them."

The last gave "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin
is covered."

Then came Mr. Folke's verse, and Netty thought it was the most beautiful
of all.

"Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city."

Then Mr. Folke talked about that city--its streets of gold, and the
gates of pearl, through which nothing that defileth can by any means
enter. He told how Jesus will make His people happy there; how they will
be with Him, and all their tears wiped away. And Jesus will be their
Shepherd; His sheep will not wander from Him any more; "and they shall
see His face, and His name shall be in their foreheads."

From school they went to church, of course. A strange clergyman preached
that day, and Nettie could not understand him always; but the words of
the hymn and Mr. Folke's words ran in her head then, and she was very
happy all church-time. And as she was walking home, still the tune and
the words ran in her ears,--

     "Jesus all the day long
     Is my joy and my song;
   O that all His salvation might see!"

So, thinking busily, Nettie got home and ran upstairs. What a change! It
looked like a place very, very far from those gates of pearl.

Her mother sat on one side of the stove, not dressed for church, and
leaning her head on her hand. Mr. Mathieson was on the other side,
talking and angry. Barry stood back, playing ball by himself by throwing
it up and catching it again. The talk stopped at Nettie's entrance. She
threw off her bonnet and began to set the table, hoping that would bring
peace.

"Your father don't want any dinner," said Mrs. Mathieson.

"Yes, I do!" thundered her husband; "but I tell you I'll not take
anything now; so leave your cooking till supper--when Lumber will be
here. Go on, child, and get your work done."

There were no preparations for dinner, and Nettie was at a loss, and did
not like to say anything for fear of bringing on a storm. Her mother
looked both weary and out of temper. The kettle was boiling, the only
thing about the room that had a pleasant seeming.

"Will you have a cup of tea, father?" said Nettie.

"Anything you like--yes, a cup of tea will do; and hark ye, child, I
want a good stout supper got this afternoon. Your mother don't choose
to hear me. Mr. Lumber is coming, and I want a good supper to make him
think he's got to the right place. Do you hear, Nettie?"

"Yes, father."

Nettie went on to do the best she could. She warmed the remains of last
night's porridge, and gave it to Barry, with treacle, to keep him
quiet. Meanwhile she had made the tea, and toasted a slice of bread
very nicely, though with great pains, for the fire wasn't good; and the
toast and a cup of tea she gave to her father. He ate it with an
eagerness which let Nettie know she must make another slice as fast as
possible.

"Hallo! Nettie--I say, give us some of that, will you?" said Barry,
finding his porridge poor in taste.

"Barry, there isn't bread enough--I can't," whispered Nettie. "We've got
to keep a loaf for supper."

"Eat what you've got, or let it alone!" thundered Mr. Mathieson, in the
way he had when he was out of patience, and which always tried Nettie
exceedingly.

"She's got more," said Barry. "She's toasting two pieces this minute. I
want one."

"I'll knock you over if you say another word," said his father.

Nettie was frightened, for she saw he meant to have the whole, and she
had destined a bit for her mother. However, when she gave her father his
second slice, she ventured, and took the other with a cup of tea to the
forlorn figure on the other side of the stove. Mrs. Mathieson took only
the tea. But Mr. Mathieson's ire was roused afresh. Perhaps toast and
tea didn't agree with him.

"Have you got all ready for Mr. Lumber?" he said, in a tone of voice
very unwilling to be pleased.

"No," said his wife,--"I have had no chance. I have been cooking and
clearing up all the morning. His room isn't ready."

"Well, you had better get it ready pretty quick. What's to do?"

"Everything's to do," said Mrs. Mathieson.

He swore at her. "Why can't you answer a plain question? I say, _what's_
to do?"

"There's all Nettie's things in the room at present. They are all to
move upstairs, and the red bedstead to bring down."

"No, mother," said Nettie, gently, "all my things are upstairs already;
there's only the cot and the bed, that I couldn't move."

Mrs. Mathieson gave no outward sign of the mixed feeling of pain
and pleasure that shot through her heart. Pleasure at her child's
thoughtful love, pain that she should have to show it in such a way.

"When did you do it, Nettie?"

"This morning before breakfast, mother. It's all ready, father, if you
or Barry would take up my cot and the bed, and bring down the other
bedstead. It's too heavy for me."

"That's what I call doing business and having some spirit," said her
father. "Not sitting and letting your work come to you. Here, Nettie,
I'll do the rest for you."

Nettie ran with him to show him what was wanted; and Mr. Mathieson's
strong arms had it all done very quickly. Nettie eagerly thanked him;
and then seeing him in good humour with her, she ventured something
more.

"Mother's very tired to-day, father," she whispered; "she'll feel better
by-and-bye if she has a little rest. Do you think you would mind helping
me put up this bedstead?"

"Well, here goes!" returned Mr. Mathieson. "Which piece belongs here, to
begin with?"

Nettie did not know much better than he; but putting not only her whole
mind but also her whole heart into it, she managed to find out and
to direct him successfully. Her part was hard work: she had to stand
holding up the heavy end of the bedstead while her father fitted in the
long pieces; and then she helped him to lace the cords, which had to be
drawn very tight; and precious time was running away fast, and Nettie
had had no dinner. But she stood patiently, with a thought in her heart
which kept her in peace all the while. When it was done, Mr. Mathieson
went out, and Nettie returned to her mother. She was sitting where she
had left her. Barry was gone.

"Mother, won't you have something to eat?"

"I can't eat, child. Have you had anything yourself?"

Nettie had seized a remnant of her father's toast, and was munching it
hastily.

"Mother, won't you put on your gown and come to church this afternoon?
Do! It will rest you. Do, mother!"

"You forget I've got to get supper, child. Your father doesn't think
it necessary that anybody should rest, or go to church, or do anything
except work. What he is thinking of, I am sure I don't know. There is no
place to eat in but this room, and he is going to bring a stranger into
it; and if I was dying I should have to get up for every meal that is
wanted. I never thought I should come to live so! And I cannot dress
myself, or prepare the victuals, or have a moment to myself, but I have
the chance of Mr. Lumber and your father in here to look on! It is worse
than a dog's life!"

It looked pretty bad, Nettie thought. She did not know what to say. She
began clearing away the things on the table.

"And what sort of a man this Mr. Lumber is, I don't know. I dare say he
is like his name--one of your father's cronies--a drinker and a swearer.
And Mr. Mathieson will bring him here, to be on my hands! It will kill
me before spring, if it lasts."

"Couldn't there be a bed made somewhere else for Barry, mother? and then
we could eat in there."

"Where would you make it? I could curtain off a corner of this room,
but Barry wouldn't have it, nor your father; and they'd all want to be
close to the fire the minute the weather grows the least bit cool. No;
there is nothing for me but to live on till Death calls for me!"

"Mother, Jesus said, 'He that liveth and believeth in Me shall never
die.'"

"Oh, yes!" said Mrs. Mathieson, with a kind of long-drawn groan, "I
don't know how it will be about that! I get so put about now in these
times, that it seems to me I don't know my own soul!"

"Mother, come to church this afternoon."

"I can't, child. I've got to put up that man's bed and make it."

"That is all done, mother, and the floor brushed up. Do come!"

"Why, who put it up?"

"Father and I."

"Well! you do beat all, Nettie. But I can't, child; I haven't time."

"Yes, mother, plenty. There's all the hour of Sunday school before
church begins. Now do, mother!"

"Well, you go off to school; and if I can, maybe I will. You go right
off, Nettie."

Nettie went, feeling weary and empty by dint of hard work and a dinner
of a small bit of dry toast. But she thought little about that. She
wanted to ask Mr. Folke a question.

The lesson that afternoon was upon the peacemakers; and Mr. Folke asked
the children what ways they knew of being a peacemaker. The answer,
somehow, was not very ready.

"Isn't it to stop people from quarrelling?" one child asked.

"How can you do that, Jane?"

Jane seemed doubtful. "I could ask them to stop," she said.

"Well, suppose you did. Would angry people mind your asking?"

"I don't know, sir. If they were very angry, I suppose they wouldn't."

"Perhaps not. One thing is certain, Jane; you must have peace in your
own heart, to give you the least chance."

"How, Mr. Folke?"

"If you want to put out a fire, you must not stick into it something
that will catch."

"That would make the fire worse," said one of the girls.

"Certainly. So if you want to touch quarrelsome spirits with the least
hope of softening them, you must be so full of the love of Jesus
yourself that nothing but love can come out of your own spirit. You see,
it means a good deal to be a peacemaker."

"I always thought that must be one of the easiest things of the whole
list," said one of the class.

"You won't find it so, I think; or rather you will find they are all
parts of the same character, and the blessing is one. But there are
more ways of being a peacemaker. What do you do when the hinge of a
door creaks?"

One said "She didn't know;" another said "Nothing." "I stop my ears,"
said a third. Mr. Folke laughed.

"_That_ would not do for a peacemaker," he said. "Don't you know what
makes machinery work smoothly?"

"Oil!" cried Jane.

"Oil to be sure! One little drop of oil will stop ever so much creaking
and groaning and complaining, of hinges and wheels and all sorts of
machines. Now, people's tempers are like wheels and hinges. But what
sort of oil shall we use?"

The girls looked at each other, and then one of them said, "Kindness."

"To be sure! A gentle word, a look of love, a little bit of kindness,
will smooth down a roughened temper or a wry face, and soften a hard
piece of work, and make all go easily. And so of reproving sinners. The
Psalmist says, 'Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and
let him reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break
my head.' But, you see, the peacemaker must be righteous himself, or he
hasn't the oil. Love is the oil--the 'love of Jesus.'"

"Mr. Folke," said Nettie, timidly, "wasn't Jesus a peacemaker?"

"The greatest that ever lived!" said Mr. Folke, his eyes lighting up
with pleasure at her question. "He made all the peace there is in the
world, for He bought it, when He died on the cross to reconcile man with
God. All our drops of oil were bought with drops of blood."

"And," said Nettie, hesitatingly, "Mr. Folke, isn't that one way of
being a peacemaker?"

"What?"

"I mean, to persuade people to be at peace with Him?"

"That is the way above all others, my child; that is truly to be the
'children of God.' Jesus came and preached peace; and that is what His
servants are doing, and will do, till He comes. And 'they shall be
called the children of God.' 'Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought
also to love one another.'"

Mr. Folke paused, with a face so full of thought, of eagerness, and of
love, that none of the children spoke, and some of them wondered. And
before Mr. Folke spoke again, the superintendent's little bell rang,
and they all stood up to sing. But Nettie Mathieson hardly could sing;
it seemed to her so glorious a thing to be _that_ sort of a peacemaker.
Could she be one? But the Lord blessed the peacemakers; then it must be
His will that all His children should be such; then He would enable her
to be one! It was a great thought. Nettie's heart swelled with hope and
joy and prayer. She knew whose peace she longed for first of all.

Her mother had now come to church, so Nettie enjoyed all the services,
with nothing to hinder. Then they walked home together, not speaking
much to each other, but every step of the way pleasant in the Sunday
afternoon light, till they got to their own door. Nettie knew what her
mother's sigh meant, as they mounted the stairs. Happily, nobody was at
home yet but themselves.

"Now, mother," said Nettie, when she had changed her dress and come to
the common room, "what's to be for supper? I'll get it. You sit still
and read, if you want to, while it's quiet. What must we have?"

"There is not a great deal to do," said Mrs. Mathieson. "I boiled the
pork this morning, and that was what set your father up so; that's
ready; and he says there must be cakes. The potatoes are all ready to
put down--I was going to boil 'em this morning, and he stopped me."

Nettie looked grave about the cakes.

"However, mother," she said, "I don't believe that little loaf of bread
would last, even if you and I didn't touch it; it is not very big."

Mrs. Mathieson wearily sat down and took her Testament, as Nettie begged
her; and Nettie put on the kettle and the pot of potatoes, and made the
cakes ready to bake. The table was set, and the treacle and everything
on it, except the hot things, when Barry burst in.

"Hallo, cakes!--hallo, treacle!" he shouted. "Pork and treacle--that's
the right sort of thing. Now we're going to live something like."

"Hush, Barry, don't make such a noise," said his sister. "You know it's
Sunday evening."

"Sunday! well, what about Sunday? What's Sunday good for, except to eat,
I should like to know?"

"O Barry!"

"O Barry!" said he, mimicking her. "Come, shut up, and fry your cake.
Father and Lumber will be here just now."

Nettie hushed, as she was bidden; and as soon as her father's step
was heard below, she went to frying cakes with all her might. She
just turned her head to give one look at Mr. Lumber as he came in. He
appeared to her very like her father, but without the recommendation
which her affection gave to Mr. Mathieson. A big, strong, burly fellow,
with the same tinges of red about his face that the summer sun had never
brought there. Nettie did not want to look again.

She had a good specimen this evening of what they might expect in
future. Mrs. Mathieson poured out the tea, and Nettie baked the cakes;
and perhaps because she was almost faint for want of something to eat,
she thought no three people ever ate so many griddle cakes before at one
meal. In vain plateful after plateful went upon the board, and Nettie
baked them as fast as she could; they were eaten just as fast; and when
finally the chairs were pushed back, and the men went downstairs, Nettie
and her mother looked at each other.

"There's only one left, mother," said Nettie.

"And he has certainly eaten half the piece of pork," said Mrs.
Mathieson. "Come, child, take something yourself; you're ready to drop.
I'll clear away."

But it is beyond the power of any disturbance to take away the gladness
of a heart where Jesus is. Nettie's bread was sweet to her, even that
evening. Before she had well finished her supper, her father and his
lodger came back. They sat down on either side the fire, and began to
talk of politics, and of their work on which they were then engaged,
with their employers and their fellow-workmen; of the state of business
in the village, and profits and losses, and the success of particular
men in making money. They talked loudly and eagerly; and Nettie had to
go round and round them to get to the fire for hot water, and back to
the table to wash up the cups and plates. Her mother was helping at
the table, but to get round Mr. Lumber to the pot of hot water on the
fire every now and then, fell to Nettie's share. It was not a very nice
ending of her sweet Sabbath day, she thought. The dishes were done and
put away, and still the talk went on as hard as ever. It was sometimes a
pleasure to Nettie's father to hear her sing hymns of a Sunday evening.
Nettie watched for a chance, and the first time there was a lull of the
voices of the two men, she asked softly,

"Shall I sing, father?"

Mr. Mathieson hesitated, and then answered,

"No,--better not, Nettie: Mr. Lumber might not find it amusing;" and the
talk began again.

Nettie waited a little longer, feeling exceedingly tired. Then she rose
and lighted a candle.

"What are you doing, Nettie?" her mother said.

"I am going to bed, mother."

"You can't take a candle up there, child! the attic's all full of
things, and you would certainly set us on fire."

"I'll take great care, mother."

"But you can't, child! The wind might blow the snuff of your candle
right into something that would be all a-flame by the time you're
asleep. You must manage without a light somehow."

"But I can't see to find my way," said Nettie, who was secretly
trembling with fear.

"I'll light you then, for once, and you'll soon learn the way. Give me
the candle."

Nettie hushed the words that came crowding into her mouth, and clambered
up the steep stairs to the attic. Mrs. Mathieson followed her with the
candle till she got to the top, and there she held it till Nettie had
found her way to the other end where her bed was. Then she said "Good
night!" and went down.

The little square shutter of the window was open, and a ray of moonlight
streamed in upon the bed. It was nicely made up: Nettie saw that her
mother had been there and had done that for her, and wrought a little
more space and order among the things around the bed. But the moonlight
did not get in far enough to show much more. Just a little of this thing
and of that could be seen; a corner of a chest, or a gleam on the side
of a meal-bag: the half-light showed nothing clearly except the confused
fulness of the little attic. Nettie had given her head a blow against a
piece of timber as she came through it; and she sat down upon her little
bed, feeling rather miserable. Her fear was that the rats might visit
her up there. She did not certainly know that there were rats in the
attic, but she had been fearing to think of them, and did not dare to
ask, as well as unwilling to give trouble to her mother; for if they
_did_ come there, Nettie did not see how the matter could be mended. She
sat down on her little bed, so much frightened that she forgot how tired
she was. Her ears were as sharp as needles, listening to hear the scrape
of a rat's tooth upon a timber, or the patter of his feet over the
floor.

For a few minutes Nettie almost thought she could not sleep up there
alone, and must go down and implore her mother to let her spread her bed
in a corner of her room. But what a bustle that would make! Her mother
would be troubled, and her father would be angry, and the lodger would
be disturbed, and there was no telling how much harm would come of it.
No; the peacemaker of the family must not do that. And then the words
floated into Nettie's mind again, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God." Like a strain of the sweetest
music it floated in; and if an angel had come and brought the words
straight to Nettie, she could not have been more comforted. She felt the
rats could not hurt her while she was within hearing of that music; and
she got up and kneeled down upon the chest under the little window, and
looked out.

It was like the day that had passed, not like the evening. So purely and
softly the moon-beams lay on all the fields and trees and hills, there
was no sign of anything but peace and purity to be seen. No noise of
men's work or voices; no clangour of the iron foundry which on week-days
might be heard; no sight of anything unlovely; but the wide beauty which
God had made, and the still peace and light which He had spread over it.
Every little flapping leaf seemed to Nettie to tell of its Maker; and
the music of those words seemed to be all through the still air--"Blessed
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God."
Tears of gladness and hope slowly gathered in Nettie's eyes. The
children of God will enter in, by-and-bye, through those pearly gates,
into that city of gold "where they need no candle, neither light of the
sun, for the Lord God giveth them light."

"So He can give me light here--or what's better than light," thought
Nettie. "God isn't only out there, in all that beautiful moonlight
world--He is here in my poor little attic too; and He will take just as
good care of me as He does of the birds, and better, for I am His child,
and they are only His beautiful little servants."

Nettie's fear was gone. She prayed her evening prayer, and trusted
herself to the Lord Jesus to take care of her; and then she undressed
herself and lay down and went to sleep, just as quietly as any sparrow
of them all, with its head under its wing.

  "O day of rest and gladness!
    O day of joy and light!
  O balm of care and sadness,
    Most beautiful, most bright!
  On thee the high and lowly,
    Through ages join'd in tune,
  Sing, Holy, Holy, Holy,
    To the great God Triune."




CHAPTER III.

_NETTIE'S GARRET._

  "I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me."--_Psalm_ xxiii. 4.


Nettie's attic grew to be a very pleasant place to her. She never heard
the least sound of rats; and it was so nicely out of the way. Barry
never came up there, and there she could not even hear the voices of
her father and Mr. Lumber. She had a tired time of it down stairs.

The first afternoon was a good specimen of the way things went on.
Nettie's mornings were always spent at school; Mrs. Mathieson would
have that, as she said, whether she could get on without Nettie or no.
From the time Nettie got home till she went to bed she was as busy as
she could be. There was so much bread to make and so much beef and pork
to boil, and so much washing of pots and kettles; and at meal-times
there was often cakes to fry, besides all the other preparations. Mr.
Mathieson seemed to have made up his mind that his lodger's rent should
all go to the table and be eaten up immediately; but the difficulty was
to make as much as he expected of it in that line; for now he brought
none of his own earnings home, and Mrs. Mathieson had more than a sad
guess where they went. By degrees he came to be very little at home in
the evenings, and he carried off Barry with him. Nettie saw her mother
burdened with a great outward and inward care at once, and stood in
the breach all she could. She worked to the extent of her strength,
and beyond it, in the endless getting and clearing away of meals; and
watching every chance, when the men were out of the way, she would coax
her mother to sit down and read a chapter in her Testament.

"It will rest you so, mother," Nettie would say; "and I will make the
bread just as soon as I get the dishes done. Do let me! I like to do
it."

Sometimes Mrs. Mathieson could not be persuaded; sometimes she would
yield, in a despondent kind of way, and sit down with the Testament, and
look at it as if neither there nor anywhere else in the universe could
she find rest or comfort any more.

"It don't signify, child," said she, one afternoon when Nettie had been
urging her to sit down and read. "I haven't the heart to do anything.
We're all driving to rack and ruin just as fast as we can go."

"Oh no, mother," said Nettie, "I don't think we are."

"I am sure of it. I see it coming every day. Every day it is a little
worse; and Barry is going along with your father; and they are
destroying me among them, body and soul too."

"No, mother," said Nettie, "I don't think that. I have prayed the Lord
Jesus, and you know He has promised to hear prayer; and I know we are
not going to ruin."

"_You_ are not, child, I believe; but you are the only one of us that
isn't. I wish I was dead, to be out of my misery!"

"Sit down, mother, and read a little bit; and don't talk so. Do,
mother! It will be an hour or more yet to supper, and I'll get it ready.
You sit down and read, and I'll make the shortcakes. Do, mother! and
you'll feel better."

It was half despair and half persuasion that made her do it; but Mrs.
Mathieson did sit down by the open window and take her Testament; and
Nettie flew quietly about, making her shortcakes and making up the fire
and setting the table, and through it all casting many a loving glance
over to the open book in her mother's hand, and the weary, stony face
that was bent over it. Nettie had not said how her own back was aching,
and she forgot it almost in her business and her thoughts; though by the
time her work was done her head was aching wearily too. But cakes and
table and fire and everything else were in readiness; and Nettie stole
up behind her mother and leaned over her shoulder--leaned a little
heavily.

"Don't that chapter comfort you, mother?" she whispered.

"No. It don't seem to me as I've got any feeling left," said Mrs.
Mathieson.

It was the fourth chapter of John at which they were both looking.

"Don't it comfort you to read of Jesus being wearied?" Nettie went on,
her head lying on her mother's shoulder.

"Why should it, child?"

"I like to read it," said Nettie. "Then I know He knows how I feel
sometimes."

"God knows everything, Nettie."

With that Mrs. Mathieson cast down her book and burst into such a
passion of weeping that Nettie was frightened. It was like the breaking
up of an icy winter. She flung her apron over her head and sobbed aloud;
till, hearing the steps of the men upon the staircase, she rushed off to
Barry's room, and presently got quiet, for she came out to supper as if
nothing had happened.

From that time there was a gentler mood upon her mother; Nettie saw,
though she looked weary and careworn as ever, there was now not often
the hard, dogged look which had been wont to be there for months past.
Nettie had no difficulty to get her to read the Testament; and of all
things, what she liked was to get a quiet hour of an evening alone with
Nettie, and hear her sing hymns. But both Nettie and she had a great
deal, as Mrs. Mathieson said, "to put up with."

As weeks went on, the father of the family was more and more out at
nights, and less and less agreeable when he was at home. He and his
friend Lumber helped each other in mischief. The lodger's rent and board
had been at first given for the household daily expenses; but then Mr.
Mathieson began to pay over a smaller sum, saying that it was all that
was due; and Mrs. Mathieson began to suspect that the rest had been
paid away already for brandy. Then Mr. Mathieson told her to trade at
Jackson's on account, and he would settle the bill. Mrs. Mathieson held
off from this as long as it was possible. She and Nettie did their very
best to make the little that was given them go a good way: they wasted
not a crumb nor a penny. By degrees it came to be very customary for
Mrs. Mathieson and Nettie to make their meal of porridge and bread,
after all the more savoury food had been devoured by the others; and
many a weary patch and darn filled the night hours because they had not
money to buy a cheap dress or two. Nettie bore it very patiently. Mrs.
Mathieson was sometimes impatient.

"This won't last me through the week, to get the things you want," she
said one Saturday to her husband, when he gave her what he said was
Lumber's payment to him.

"You'll have to make it last," said he gruffly.

"Will you tell me how I'm going to do that? Here isn't more than half
what you gave me at first."

"Send to Jackson's for what you want!" he roared at her; "didn't I tell
you so? and don't come bothering me with your noise."

"When will you pay Jackson?"

"I'll pay you first!" he said, with an oath, and very violently. It was
a ruder word than he had ever said to her before, and Mrs. Mathieson
was staggered for a moment by it; but there was another word she was
determined to say.

"May do what you like to me," she said, doggedly; "but I should think
you would see for yourself that Nettie has too much to get on with. She
is getting just as thin and pale as she can be."

"That's just your fool's nonsense!" said Mr. Mathieson; but he spoke it
more quietly. Nettie just then entered the room.

"Here, Nettie, what ails you? Come here. Let's look at you. Ain't you as
strong as ever you was? Here's your mother says you're getting puny."

Nettie's smile and answer were so placid and untroubled, and the little
colour that rose in her cheeks at her father's question made her look so
fresh and well, that he was quieted. He drew her within his arms, for
his gentle, dutiful little daughter had a place in his respect and
affection both, though he did not often show it very broadly; but now he
kissed her.

"There!" said he; "don't you go to growing thin and weak without telling
me, for I don't like such doings. You tell me when you want anything."
But with that Mr. Mathieson got up and went off out of the house; and
Nettie had small chance to tell him if she wanted anything. However,
this little word and kiss were a great comfort and pleasure to her. It
was the last she had from him in a good while.

Nettie, however, was not working for praise or kisses, and very little
of either she got. Generally her father was rough, imperious, impatient,
speaking fast enough if anything went wrong, but very sparing in
expressions of pleasure. Sometimes a blessing did come upon her from the
very depth of Mrs. Mathieson's heart, and went straight to Nettie's; but
it was for another blessing she laboured, and prayed, and waited.

As the summer passed away, it began to grow cold, too, up in her garret.
Nettie had never thought of that. As long as the summer sun warmed the
roof well in the day, and only the soft summer wind played in and out
of her window at night, it was all very well, and Nettie thought her
sleeping-chamber was the best in the whole house, for it was nearest the
sky. But August departed with its sunny days, and September grew cool in
the evening; and October brought still sunny days, it is true, but the
nights had a clear sharp frost in them; and Nettie was obliged to cover
herself up warm in bed and look at the moonlight and the stars as she
could see them through the little square opening left by the shutter.
The stars looked very lovely to Nettie, when they peeped at her so in
her bed out of their high heaven; and she was very content.

Then came November; and the winds began to come into the garret, not
only through the open window, but through every crack between two
boards. The whole garret was filled with the winds, Nettie thought. It
was hard work managing then. Shutting the shutter would bar out the
stars, but not the wind, she found; and to keep from being quite chilled
through at her times of prayer, morning and evening, Nettie used to take
the blanket and coverlets from the bed, and wrap herself in them. It was
all she could do. Still, she forgot the inconveniences; and her little
garret chamber seemed to Nettie very near heaven, as well as near the
sky.

But all this way of life did not make her grow strong or rosy; and
though Nettie never told her father that she wanted anything, her
mother's heart measured the times when it ought to be told.




CHAPTER IV.

_THE BROWN CLOAK IN NOVEMBER._

  "How long, O Lord?"--_Rev._ vi. 10.


November days drew toward an end; December was near. One afternoon Mrs.
Mathieson, wanting Nettie, went to the foot of the garret stairs to call
her.

"Yes, mother. Coming."

"Fetch down your school cloak, child."

She went back to her room, and presently Nettie came in with the cloak,
looking placid as usual, but very pale.

"Somebody's got to go to Mr. Jackson's, but you ain't fit, child; you
ate next to nothing at noon. You can't live on porridge."

"I like it, mother; but I wasn't hungry. What's wanting from
Jackson's?"

Nettie put on her cloak, and took her basket, and went out. It was after
sundown already, and a keen wind swept through the village street, and
swept through Nettie's brown cloak too, tight as she wrapt it about her.
But though she was cold and blue, and the wind seemed to go through
_her_ as well as the cloak, Nettie was thinking of something else. She
knew that her mother had eaten a very scanty, poor sort of dinner, as
well as herself, and that _she_ often looked pale and wan; and Nettie
was almost ready to wish she had not given the last penny of her
shilling on Sunday to the missionary-box.

"What do you want?" said Mr. Jackson, rather curtly, when Nettie's turn
came to be served, and she had told her errand. "What!" he exclaimed,
"seven pounds of meal, and a pound of butter, and two pounds of sugar!
Well, you tell your father that I should like to have my bill settled;
it's all drawn up, you see, and I don't like to open a new account till
it's all square."

He turned away immediately to another customer, and Nettie felt she
had got her answer. She stood a moment, very disappointed, and a little
mortified, and somewhat downhearted. What should they do for supper? and
what a storm there would be when her father heard about all this, and
found nothing but bread and tea on the table! Slowly Nettie turned away,
and slowly made the few steps from the door to the corner. She felt
very blue indeed; coming out of the warm store, the chill wind made her
shiver. Just at the corner somebody stopped her.

"Nettie!" said the voice of the little French baker, "what ails you? you
look not well."

Nettie gave her a grateful smile, and said she was well.

"You look not like it," said Madame Auguste; "you look as if the wind
might carry you off before you get home. Come to my house; I want to see
you in the light."

"I haven't time; I must go home to mother, Mrs. August."

"Yes, I know! You will go home all the faster for coming this way first.
You have not been to see me in these three or four weeks."

She carried Nettie along with her; it was but a step, and Nettie did not
feel capable of resisting anything. The little Frenchwoman put her into
the shop before her, made her sit down, and lighted a candle. The shop
was nice and warm, and full of the savoury smell of fresh baking.

"We have made our own bread lately," said Nettie, in answer to the
charge of not coming there.

"Do you make it good?" said Madame Auguste.

"It isn't like yours, Mrs. August," said Nettie, smiling.

"If you will come and live with me next summer, I will teach you how to
do some things; and you shall not look so blue neither. Have you had
your supper?"

"No; and I am just going home to get supper. I must go, Mrs. August."

"You come in here," said the Frenchwoman; "you are my prisoner. I am all
alone, and I want somebody for company. You take off your cloak, Nettie,
and I shall give you something to keep the wind out. You do what I bid
you!"

Nettie felt too cold and weak to make any ado about complying, unless
duty had forbade; and she thought there was time enough yet. She let
her cloak drop, and took off her hood. The little back room to which
Madame Auguste had brought her was only a trifle bigger than the bit
of a shop; but it was as cozy as it was little. A tiny stove warmed it,
and kept warm, too, a tiny iron pot and tea-kettle, which were steaming
away. The bed was at one end, draped nicely with red curtains; there was
a little looking-glass, and some prints in frames round the walls; there
was Madame's little table covered with a purple cloth, and with her work
and a small clock and various pretty things on it. Madame Auguste had
gone to a cupboard in the wall, and taken out a couple of plates and
little bowls, which she set on a little round stand; and then lifting
the cover of the pot on the stove, she ladled out a bowlful of what was
in it, and gave it to Nettie with one of her nice crisp rolls.

"Eat that!" she said. "I shan't let you go home till you have swallowed
that to keep the cold out. It makes me all freeze to look at you."

So she filled her own bowl, and made good play with her spoon, while
between spoonfuls she looked at Nettie; and the good little woman
smiled in her heart to see how easy it was for Nettie to obey her. The
savoury, simple, comforting broth she had set before her was the best
thing to the child's delicate stomach that she had tasted for many a
day.

"Is it good?" said the Frenchwoman, when Nettie's bowl was half empty.

"It's so good!" said Nettie. "I didn't know I was so hungry."

"Now you will not feel the cold so," said the Frenchwoman, "and you will
go back quicker. Do you like my _riz-au-gras_?"

"_What_ is it, ma'am?" said Nettie.

The Frenchwoman laughed, and made Nettie say it over till she could
pronounce the words.

"Now you like it," she said, "that is a French dish. Do you think Mrs.
Mat'ieson would like it?"

"I am sure she would!" said Nettie. "But I don't know how to make it."

"You shall come here, and I will teach it to you. And now you shall
carry a little home to your mother, and ask her if she will do the
honour to a French dish to approve it. It do not cost anything. I
cannot sell much bread the winters; I live on what cost me nothing."

While saying this, Madame Auguste had filled a little pail with the
_riz-au-gras_, and put a couple of her rolls along with it. "It must
have the French bread," she said; and she gave it to Nettie, who looked
quite cheered up, and very grateful.

"You are a good little girl!" she said. "How keep you always your
face looking so happy? There is always one little streak of sunshine
here"--drawing her finger across above Nettie's eyebrows--"and another
here,"--and her finger passed over the line of Nettie's lips.

"That's because I _am_ happy, Mrs. August."

"_Always?_"

"Yes, always."

"What makes you so happy always? You was just the same in the cold
winter out there, as when you was eating my _riz-au-gras_. Now, me--I
am cross in the cold, and not happy."

But the Frenchwoman saw a deeper light come into Nettie's eyes as she
answered,

"It is because I love the Lord Jesus, Mrs. August, and He makes me
happy."

"_You?_" said Madame. "My child! What do you say, Nettie? I think not I
have heard you right."

"Yes, Mrs. August, I am happy because I love Jesus. I know He loves me,
and He will take me to be with Him."

"Not just yet," said the Frenchwoman, "I hope. Well, I wish I was so
happy as you, Nettie. Good bye!"

Nettie ran home, more comforted by her good supper, and more thankful
to the goodness of God in giving it, and happy in the feeling of His
goodness, than can be told. And very, very glad she was of that little
tin pail in her hand she knew her mother needed. Mrs. Mathieson had time
to eat the rice broth before her husband came in.

"She said she would show me how to make it," said Nettie, "and it don't
cost anything."

"Why, it's just rice and--_what_ is it? I don't see," said Mrs.
Mathieson. "It isn't rice and milk."

Nettie laughed at her mother.

"Mrs. August didn't tell. She called it reeso--I forget what she called
it!"

"It's the best thing I ever saw," said Mrs. Mathieson. "There--put the
pail away. Your father's coming."

He was in a terrible humour, as they expected; and Nettie and her mother
had a sad evening of it. And the same sort of thing lasted for several
days. Mrs. Mathieson hoped that perhaps Mr. Lumber would take into his
head to seek lodgings somewhere else, or, at least, that Mathieson would
have been shamed into paying Jackson's bill; but neither thing happened.
Mr. Lumber found his quarters too comfortable; and Mr. Mathieson spent
too much of his earnings on drink to find the amount necessary to clear
off the scores at the grocer's shop.

From that time, as they could run up no new account, the family were
obliged to live on what they could immediately pay for. That was seldom
a sufficient supply; and so, in dread of the storms that came whenever
their wants touched Mr. Mathieson's own comfort, Nettie and her mother
denied themselves constantly what they very much needed. The old can
sometimes bear this better than the young. Nettie grew more delicate,
more thin, and more feeble every day. It troubled her mother sadly. Mr.
Mathieson could not be made to see it. Indeed, he was little at home
except when he was eating.

  "Scarce discerning aught before us,
    On our weary way we go;
  But one guiding star is o'er us,
    Beaming forth the way to show.

  "Watch we, pray we, that we sink not,
    Journeying on while yet we can;
  At a moment when we think not
    We shall meet the Son of Man."




CHAPTER V.

_THE NEW BLANKET._

  "Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord."
  _Ps._ cxxxiv. 2.


It was very cold up in Nettie's garret now; the winter had moved on
into the latter part of December, and the frosts were very keen; and the
winter winds seemed to come in at one end of the attic and to just sweep
through to the other, bringing all except the snow with them. Even the
snow often drifted in through the cracks of the rough wainscoat board,
or under the shutter, and lay in little white streaks or heaps on the
floor, and never melted. To-night there was no wind, and Nettie had left
her shutter open, that she might see the stars as she lay in bed. It did
not make much difference in the feeling of the place, for it was about
as cold inside as out; and the stars were great friends of Nettie's.
How bright they looked down to-night! It was very cold, and lying awake
made Nettie colder: she shivered sometimes under all her coverings;
still she lay looking at the stars in that square patch of sky that her
shutter-opening gave her to see, and thinking of the Golden City. "They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters; and God shall wipe all tears from their eyes."

"His servants shall serve Him,"--thought Nettie; "and mother will be
there, and Barry--and I shall be there! and then I shall be happy. And
I am happy now. 'Blessed be the Lord, which hath not turned away my
prayer, nor His mercy from me!'" And if that verse went through Nettie's
head once, it did fifty times: so did this one, which the quiet stars
seemed to repeat and whisper to her, "The Lord redeemeth the soul of His
servants, and none of them that trust in Him shall be desolate." And
though now and then a shiver passed over Nettie's shoulders with the
cold, she was ready to sing for very gladness and fulness of heart.

But lying awake and shivering did not do Nettie's little body any
good; she looked so very white the next day that it caught even Mr.
Mathieson's attention. He reached out his arm and drew Nettie toward
him, as she was passing between the cupboard and the table. Then he
looked at her, but he did not say how she looked.

"Do you know the day after to-morrow is Christmas Day?" said he.

"Yes, I know. It's the day when Christ was born," said Nettie.

"Well, I don't know anything about that," said her father; "but what I
mean is, that a week after is New Year. What would you like me to give
you, Nettie,--hey?"

Nettie stood still for a moment, then her eyes lighted up.

"Will you give it to me, father, if I tell you?"

"I don't know. If it is not extravagant, perhaps I will."

"It will not cost much," said Nettie, earnestly. "Will you give me what
I choose, father, if it does not cost too much?"

"I suppose I will. What is it?"

"Father, you won't be displeased?"

"Not I!" said Mr. Mathieson, drawing Nettie's little form tighter in his
grasp: he thought he had never felt it so slight and thin before.

"Father, I am going to ask you a great thing!--to go to church with me
New Year's Day."

"To church!" said her father, frowning; but he remembered his promise,
and he felt Nettie in his arms yet. "What on earth good will that do
you?"

"A great deal of good. It would please me so much, father."

"What do you want me to go to church for?" said Mr. Mathieson, not sure
yet what humour he was going to be in.

"To thank God, father, that there was a Christmas, when Jesus came, that
we might have a New Year."

"What--what!" said Mr. Mathieson. "What are you talking about?"

"Because, father," said Nettie, trembling, and seizing her chance,
"since Jesus loved us, and came and died for us, we all may have a New
Year of glory. I shall, father; and I want you too. Oh do, father!" and
Nettie burst into tears.

Mr. Mathieson held her fast, and his face showed a succession of changes
for a minute or so. But she presently raised her head and kissed him,
and said,

"May I have what I want, father?"

"Yes--go along," said Mr. Mathieson. "I should like to know how to
refuse you, though. But, Nettie, don't you want me to give you anything
else?"

"Nothing else!" she told him, with her face all shining with joy.

Mr. Mathieson looked at her, and seemed very thoughtful all supper-time.

"Can't you strengthen that child up a bit?" he said to his wife
afterwards. "She does too much."

"She does as little as I can help," said Mrs. Mathieson, "but she is
always at something. I am afraid her room is too cold o' nights. She
ain't fit to bear it. It's bitter up there."

"Give her another blanket or quilt, then," said her husband. "I should
think you would see to that. Does she say she is cold?"

"No,--never, except sometimes when I see her looking blue, and ask her."

"And what does she say then?"

"She says sometimes she is a little cold," said Mrs. Mathieson.

"Well, do put something more over her, and have no more of it!" said her
husband, violently. "Sit still and let the child be cold, when another
covering would make it all right!"--and he ended with swearing at her.

Mrs. Mathieson did not dare to tell him that Nettie's food was not of a
sufficiently nourishing kind: she knew what the answer to that would be;
and she feared that a word more about Nettie's sleeping-room would be
thought an attack upon Mr. Lumber's being in the house. So she was
silent.

But there came home something for Nettie in the course of the Christmas
week, which comforted her a little, and perhaps quieted Mr. Mathieson
too. He brought with him, on coming home to supper one evening, a great
thick roll of a bundle, and put it in Nettie's arms, telling her that
was for her New Year.

"For me?" said Nettie, the colour starting a little into her cheeks.

"Yes, for you. Open it, and see."

So Nettie did, with some trouble, and there tumbled out upon the floor a
great heavy warm blanket, new from the shop. Mr. Mathieson thought the
pink in her cheeks was the prettiest thing he had seen in a long while.

"Is this for _me_, father?"

"I mean it to be so. See if it will go on that bed of yours, and keep
you warm."

Nettie gave her father some very hearty thanks, which he took in a
silent, pleased way; and then she hastened off with her blanket
upstairs. How thick and warm it was! and how nicely it would keep her
comfortable when she knelt all wrapped up in it on that cold floor! For
a little while it would; not even a warm blanket would keep her from the
cold more than a little while at a time up there. But Nettie tried its
powers the first thing she did.

Did Mr. Mathieson mean the blanket to take the place of his promise?
Nettie thought of that, but like a wise child she said nothing at all
till the Sunday morning came. Then, before she set off for Sunday
school, she came to her father's elbow.

"Father, I'll be home at a quarter after ten; will you be ready then?"

"Ready for what?" said Mr. Mathieson.

"For my New Year's gift," said Nettie. "You know you promised I should
go to church with you."

"Did I? And ain't you going to take the blanket for your New Year's
gift, and let me off, Nettie?"

"No, father, to be sure not. I'll be home at a quarter past; please
don't forget." And Nettie went off to school very thankful and happy,
for her father's tone was not unkind. How glad she was New Year's Day
had come on Sunday!

Mr. Mathieson was as good as his word. He was ready at the time, and
they walked to the church together. That was a great day to Nettie.
Her father and mother going to church in company with her and with
each other! And when they got to church, it seemed as if every word of
the prayers, and of the reading, and of the hymns, and of the sermon,
struck on all Nettie's nerves of hearing and feeling. Would her father
understand any of those sweet words? would he feel them? would they
reach him? Nettie little thought that what he felt most, what _did_
reach him, though he did not thoroughly understand it, was the look
of her own face, though she never but once dared turn it toward him.
There was a little colour in it more than usual; her eye was deep in
its earnestness; and the grave set of her little mouth was broken up
now and then in a way that Mr. Mathieson wanted to watch better than
the straight sides of her sun-bonnet would let him. Once he thought
he saw something more.

He walked home very soberly, and was a good deal on the silent order
during the rest of the day. He did not go to church in the afternoon.
But in the evening, as her mother was busy in and out getting supper
ready, and Mr. Lumber had not come in, Mr. Mathieson called Nettie to
his side.

"What were you crying for in church this forenoon?" he said low.

"Crying!" said Nettie, surprised. "Was I crying?"

"If it wasn't tears I saw dropping from under your hands on to the
floor, it must have been some drops of rain that had got there, and I
don't see how they could very well. There warn't no rain outside. What
was it for, hey?"

There came a great flush all over Nettie's face, and she did not at once
speak.

"Hey?--what was it for?"--repeated Mr. Mathieson.

The flush passed away. Nettie spoke very low, and with lips all of
a quiver. "I remember. I was thinking, father, how 'all things are
ready'--and I couldn't help wishing that you were ready too."

"Ready for what?" said Mr. Mathieson, somewhat roughly. "All things
ready for what?"

"Ready for you," said Nettie. "Jesus is ready to love you, and calls
you--and the angels are ready to rejoice for you--and I----"

"Go on. What of you?"

Nettie lifted her eyes to him. "I am ready to rejoice too, father."

But the time of rejoicing was not yet. Nettie burst into tears.

Mr. Mathieson was not angry, yet he flung away from her with a rude
"Pshaw!" and that was all the answer she got. But the truth was, that
there was something in Nettie's look of tenderness, and purity, and
trembling hope, that her father's heart could not bear to meet; and,
what is more, that he was never able to forget.

Nettie went about her evening business, helping her mother, and keeping
back the tears which were very near again; and Mr. Mathieson began to
talk with Mr. Lumber, and everything was to all appearance just as it
had been hitherto. And so it went on after that.

  "Well I know thy troubles,
    O My servant true!
  Thou art very weary--
    I was weary too:
  But that toil shall make thee
    Some day all Mine own;
  And the end of sorrow
    Shall be near My throne!"




CHAPTER VI.

_THE HOUSE-RAISING._[1]

  "In your patience possess ye your souls."--_Luke_ xxi. 19.


It grew colder and colder in Nettie's garret--or else she grew thinner
and felt it more. She certainly thought it was colder. The snow came,
and piled a thick covering on the roof, and stopped up some of the
chinks in the clapboarding with its white caulking; and that made the
place a little better: then the winds from off the snow-covered country
were keen and bitter.

     Footnote 1: A festival common in America on the completion of a
                 house.

One morning Nettie went to Barry secretly in his room, and asked him to
bring the pail of water from the spring for her. Barry had no mind to
the job.

"Why can't mother do it," he said, "if you can't?"

"Mother is busy and hasn't a minute. I always do it for her."

"Well, why can't you go on doing it? You're accustomed to it, you see,
and I don't like going out so early," said Barry, stretching himself.

"I would, and I wouldn't ask you, only, Barry, somehow I don't think I'm
quite strong lately, and I can hardly bring the pail--it's so heavy to
me. I have to stop and rest ever so many times before I can get to the
house with it."

"Well, if you stop and rest, I suppose it won't hurt you," said Barry.
"_I_ should want to stop and rest too, myself."

His little sister was turning away, giving it up, when she was met by
her father, who stepped in from the entry. He looked red with anger.

"You take the pail, and go get the water!" said he to his son; "and you
hear me! Don't you let Nettie bring in another pailful when you're at
home, or I'll turn you out of the house. You lazy scoundrel! You don't
deserve the bread you eat. Would you let her work for you, when you are
as strong as sixty?"

Barry's grumbled words in answer were so very unsatisfactory, that Mr.
Mathieson in a rage advanced towards him with uplifted fist; but Nettie
sprang in between, and very nearly caught the blow that was meant for
her brother.

"Please, father, don't!" she cried;--"please, father, don't be angry!
Barry didn't think--he didn't----"

"Why didn't he?" said Mr. Mathieson. "Great lazy rascal! He wants to be
flogged."

"Oh, don't!" said Nettie: "he didn't know why I asked him, or he
wouldn't have refused me."

"Why did you, then?"

"Because it made my back ache so to bring it--I couldn't help asking
him."

"Did you ever ask him before?"

"Never mind, please, father!" said Nettie, sweetly. "Just don't think
about me, and don't be angry with Barry. It's no matter now."

"Who does think about you? Your mother don't, or she would have seen to
this before."

"Mother didn't know my back ached. Father, you know she hasn't a minute:
she is so busy getting breakfast in time; and she didn't know I wasn't
strong enough. Father, don't tell her, please, I asked Barry. It would
worry her so. Please don't, father."

"_You_ think of folks, anyhow. You're a regular peacemaker!" exclaimed
Mr. Mathieson, as he turned away and left her. Nettie stood still, the
flush paling on her cheek, her hand pressed to her side.

"Am I that?" she thought. "Shall I be that? O Lord, my Saviour, my dear
Redeemer, send Thy peace here!" She was still in the same place and
position when Barry came in again.

"It's wretched work!" he exclaimed, under his breath, for his father was
in the next room. "It's as slippery as the plague going down that path
to the water: it's no use to have legs, for you can't hold up. I'm all
froze stiff with the water I've spilt on me!"

"I know it's very slippery," said Nettie.

"And then you can't get at the water when you're there, without stepping
into it--it's filled chuck full of snow and ice all over the edge. It's
the most wretched work!"

"I know it, Barry," said Nettie. "I am sorry you have to do it."

"Why did you make me do it, then?" said he angrily. "You got it your own
way this time. But never mind; I'll be even with you for it."

"Barry," said his sister, "please do it just a little while for me,
till I get stronger and don't mind; and as soon as ever I can I'll do it
again. But you don't know how it made me ache all through, bringing the
pail up that path."

"Stuff!" said Barry. And from that time, though he did not fail to bring
the water in the morning, yet Nettie saw he owed her a grudge for it all
the day afterward. He was almost always away with his father, and she
had little chance to win him to better feeling.

So the winter slowly passed and the spring came. Spring months came, at
least; and now and then, to be sure, a sweet spring day, when all nature
softened; the sun shone mildly, the birds sang, the air smelt sweet with
the opening buds.

"There's that house-raising to-morrow, Nettie," said Mrs. Mathieson;
"it's been on my mind this fortnight past, and it kills me."

"Why, mother?"

"I know how it will be," said Mrs. Mathieson: "they'll have a grand
set-to after they get it up, and your father'll be in the first of it;
and I somehow feel as if it would be the finishing of him. I wish almost
he'd get ill--or anything to keep him away. They make such a time after
a house-raising."

"Oh, mother, don't wish that," said Nettie; but she began to think how
it would be possible to withdraw her father from the frolic with which
the day's business would be ended. Mr. Mathieson was a carpenter, and a
fine workman, and always had plenty of work, and was much looked up to
among his fellows.

Nettie began to think whether _she_ could make any effort to keep her
father from the dangers into which he was so fond of plunging. Hitherto
she had done nothing but pray for him: could she do anything more, with
any chance of good coming of it? She thought and thought, and resolved
that she must try. It did not look hopeful; there was little she could
urge to lure Mr. Mathieson from his drinking companions; nothing except
her own timid affection and the one other thing it was possible to offer
him--a good supper. How to get that was not so easy; but she consulted
with her mother.

Mrs. Mathieson said she used in her younger days to know how to make
waffles[2], and Mr. Mathieson used to think they were the best things
that ever were made: now, if Mrs. Moss, a neighbour, would lend her
waffle-iron, and she could get a few eggs, she believed she could manage
it still.

     Footnote 2: _Waffles_, a species of sweet cake used on such
                 festivals in America.

"But we haven't the eggs, child," she said; "and I don't believe any
power under heaven can get him to come away from that raising frolic."

Nor did Nettie. It was to no power _under_ heaven that she trusted. But
she must use her means. She easily got the iron from Mrs. Moss. Then she
borrowed the eggs from Madame Auguste, who in Lent-time always had them;
then she watched with grave eyes, and many a heart-prayer the while, the
mixing and making of the waffles.

"How do you manage the iron, mother?"

"Why, it is made hot," said Mrs. Mathieson, "very hot, and buttered; and
then, when the batter is light, you pour it in and clap it together, and
put it in the stove."

"But how can you pour it in, mother? I don't see how you can fill the
iron."

"Why, you can't, child; you fill one half, and shut it together: and
when it bakes it rises up and fills the other half. You'll see."

The first thing Nettie asked when she came home from school in the
afternoon was, if the waffles were light?

She never saw any look better, Mrs. Mathieson said. "But I forgot,
child, we ought to have cinnamon and white sugar to eat on them. It was
so that your father used to admire them; they won't be waffles without
sugar and cinnamon. I'm afraid he'll think----but I don't believe you'll
get him home to think anything about them."

Mrs. Mathieson ended with a sigh. Nettie said nothing; she went round
the room, putting it in particularly nice order, then set the table.
When all that was right, she went up to her garret, and knelt down and
prayed that God would take care of her and bless her errand. She put the
whole matter in the Lord's hands; then she dressed herself in her hood
and cloak, and went down to her mother. Mr. Mathieson had not come
home to dinner, being busy with the house-raising; so they had had no
opportunity to invite him, and Nettie was now on her way to do it.

"It's turned a bad afternoon; I'm afraid it ain't fit for you to go,
Nettie."

"I don't mind," said Nettie. "Maybe I'll get some sugar and cinnamon,
mother, before I come back."

"Well, you know where the raising is; it's out on the Shallonway road,
on beyond Mrs. August's a good bit."

Nettie nodded and went out; and as the door closed on her grave, sweet
little face, her mother felt a great strain on her heart. She would have
been glad to relieve herself by tears, but it was a dry pain that would
not be relieved so. She went to the window and looked out at the
weather.

  "Lord, Thy children guide and keep,
    As with feeble steps they press
  On the pathway rough and steep,
    Through this weary wilderness.
  Holy JESU, day by day
  Lead us in the narrow way.

  "There are stony ways to tread;
    Give the strength we sorely lack.
  There are tangled paths to thread;
    Light us, lest we miss the track.
  Holy JESU, day by day
  Lead us in the narrow way."




CHAPTER VII.

_THE WAFFLES._

  "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways
  my ways," saith the Lord.--_Isaiah_ lv. 8.


The early part of the day had been brilliant and beautiful; then,
March-like, it had changed about, gathered up a whole skyful of clouds,
and turned at last to snowing. The large feathery flakes were falling
now fast; melting as fast as they fell; making everything wet and
chill, in the air and under the foot. Nettie had no overshoes: she was
accustomed to get her feet wet very often, so that was nothing new. She
hugged herself in her brown cloak, on which the beautiful snow-flakes
rested white a moment and then melted away, gradually wetting the
covering of her arms and shoulders in a way that would reach through
by-and-bye. Nettie thought little of it. What was she thinking of? She
was comforting herself with the thought of that strong and blessed
Friend who has promised to be always with His servants, and remembering
His promise, "They shall not be ashamed that wait for me." What did
the snow and the wet matter to Nettie? Yet she looked too much like a
snow-flake herself when she reached Mr. Jackson's store and went in.
The white frost had lodged all round her old black silk hood, and even
edged the shoulders of her brown cloak; and the white little face within
looked just as pure.

Mr. Jackson looked at her with more than usual attention; and when
Nettie asked him if he would let her have a shilling's-worth of fine
white sugar and cinnamon, and trust her till the next week for the
money, he made not the slightest difficulty, but measured or weighed it
out for her directly, and even said he would trust her for more than
that. So Nettie thanked him, and went on to the less easy part of her
errand. Her heart began to beat a little bit now.

The feathery snowflakes fell thicker, and made everything wetter than
ever; it was very raw and chill, and few people were abroad. Nettie went
on, past the little bake-woman's house, and past all the thickly built
part of the village. Then came houses more scattered--large handsome
houses, with beautiful gardens and grounds, and handsome palings along
the road-side. Past one or two of these, and then there was a space
of wild ground; and here Mr. Jackson was putting up a new house for
himself, and meant to have a fine place. The wild bushes grew in a thick
hedge along by the fence, but over the tops of them Nettie could see the
new timbers of the frame that the carpenters had been raising that day.
She went on till she came to an opening in the hedge and fence as well,
and then the new building was close before her. The men were at work
yet, finishing their day's business; the sound of hammering rang sharp
on all sides of the frame; some were up on the ladders, some were below.
Nettie walked slowly up and then round the place, searching for her
father. At last she found him. He and Barry, who was learning his
father's trade, were on the ground at one side of the frame, busy as
bees. Talking was going on roundly too, as well as hammering, and Nettie
drew near and stood a few minutes without any one noticing her. She was
not in a hurry to interrupt the work nor to tell her errand: she
waited.

Barry saw her first, but ungraciously would not speak to her nor for
her. If she was there for anything, he said to himself, it was for some
spoil-sport; and one pail of water a day was enough for him. Mr.
Mathieson was looking the other way.

"I say, Mathieson," called one of the men from the inside of the frame,
"I s'pose 'tain't worth carrying any of this stuff--Jackson'll have
enough without it?"

The words were explained, to Nettie's horror, by a jug in the man's
hands, which he lifted to his lips.

"Jackson will do something handsome in that way to-night," said Nettie's
father; "or he'll not do as he's done by, such a wet evening. But I've
stood to my word, and I expect he'll stand to his'n."

"He gave his word there was to be oysters, warn't it?" called another
man, from the top of the ladder.

"Punch and oysters," said Mathieson, hammering away, "or I've raised the
last frame I ever _will_ raise for him. I expect he'll stand it."

"Oysters ain't much 'count," said another speaker. "I'd rather have a
slice of good sweet pork any day."

"Father," said Nettie. She had come close up to him, but she trembled.
What possible chance could she have?

"Holloa!" said Mr. Mathieson, turning suddenly. "Nettie!--what's the
matter, girl?"

He spoke roughly, and Nettie saw that his face was red. She trembled all
over, but spoke as bravely as she could.

"Father, I am come to invite you home to supper to-night. Mother and I
have a particular reason to want to see you. Will you come?"

"Come where?" said Mr. Mathieson, but half understanding her.

"Come home to tea, father. I came to ask you. Mother has made something
you like."

"I'm busy, child. Go home. I'm going to supper at Jackson's. Go home."

He turned to his hammering again. But Nettie stood still in the snow and
waited.

"Father," she said, after a minute, coming yet closer and speaking more
low.

"What! ain't you gone?" exclaimed Mr. Mathieson.

"Father," said Nettie, softly, "mother has made waffles for you; and you
used to like them so much, she says; and they are light and beautiful,
and just ready to bake. Won't you come and have them with us? Mother
says they'll be very nice."

"Why didn't she make 'em another time," grumbled Barry, "when we weren't
going to punch and oysters? That's a better game."

If Mathieson had not been drinking, he might have been touched by the
sight of Nettie; so very white and delicate her little face looked,
trembling and eager, within that border of her black hood, on which
the snow crystals lay, a very doubtful and unwholesome embroidery. She
looked as if she was going to melt and disappear like one of them; and
perhaps Mr. Mathieson did feel the effect of her presence, but he felt
it only to be vexed and irritated; and Barry's suggestion fell into
ready ground.

"I tell you, go home!" he said, roughly. "What are you doing here? I
tell you I'm _not_ coming home--I'm engaged to supper to-night, and I'm
not going to miss it for any fool's nonsense. Go home!"

Nettie's lip trembled, but that was all the outward show of the
agitation within. She would not have delayed to obey if her father had
been quite himself; but in his present condition she thought perhaps
the next word might undo the last; she could not go without another
trial. She waited an instant, and again said softly and pleadingly,
"Father, I've been and got cinnamon and sugar for you,--all ready."

"Cinnamon and sugar--" he cursed with a great oath; and turning, gave
Nettie a violent push from him, which was half a blow. "Go home!" he
repeated--"go home and mind your own business, and don't take it upon
you to mind mine."

Nettie reeled, staggered, and coming blindly against one or two timbers
that lay on the ground, she fell heavily over them. Nobody saw her; but
that her father should have laid a rough hand on her hurt her sorely;
it hurt her bitterly. He had never done so before; and the cause why he
came to do it now rather made it more sorrowful than less so to Nettie's
mind.

She could not help a few salt tears from falling; and for a moment
Nettie's faith trembled. Feeling weak, and broken, and miserable, the
thought came coldly across her mind, _would_ the Lord not hear her,
after all? It was but a moment of faith-trembling, but it made her
ill. There was more to do that: the push and fall over the timbers had
jarred her more than she knew at the moment. Nettie walked slowly back
on her road till she neared the shop of Madame Auguste, then she felt
herself growing very ill, and just reached the Frenchwoman's door to
faint away on her steps.

She did not remain there two seconds. Madame Auguste had seen her go by
an hour before, and now sat at her window looking out to amuse herself,
but with a special intent to see and waylay that pale child on her
repassing the house. She saw the little black hood reappear, and started
to open the door, just in time to see Nettie fall down at her threshold.
As instantly, two willing arms were put under her, and lifted up the
child and bore her into the house. Then Madame took off her hood, touched
her lips with brandy, and her brow with Cologne water, and chafed her
hands. She had laid Nettie on the floor of the inner room, and put a
pillow under her head; the strength which had brought her so far having
failed there, and proved unequal to lift her again and put her on the
bed. Nettie presently came to, opened her eyes, and looked at her nurse.

"Why, my Nettie," said the little woman, "what is this, my child? what
is the matter with you?"

"I don't know. But I must go home!" said Nettie, trying to raise
herself. "Mother will want me--she'll want me."

"You will lie still, like a good child," said her friend, gently
putting her back on her pillow; "and I will find some person to carry
you home--or some person what will bring your mother here. I will go
see if I can find some one now. You lie still, Nettie."

Nettie lay still, feeling weak after that exertion of trying to raise
herself. She was quite restored now, and her first thoughts were of
grief that she had for a moment failed to trust fully the Lord's
promises. She fully trusted them now. Let her father do what he would,
let things look as dark as they might, Nettie felt sure that "the
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him" had a blessing in store for
her. Bible words, sweet and long loved and rested on, came to her mind,
and Nettie rested on them with perfect rest. "For He hath not despised
nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted; neither hath He hid His
face from him; but when he cried unto Him, _He heard_." "Our heart shall
rejoice in Him, _because we have trusted in His holy name_." Prayer for
forgiveness, and a thanksgiving of great peace, filled Nettie's heart
all the while the Frenchwoman was gone.

Meanwhile Madame Auguste had been looking into the street, and seeing
nobody out in the wet snow, she rushed back to Nettie. Nettie was like
herself now, only very pale.

"I must have cut my lip somehow," she said; "there's blood on my
handkerchief. How did I come in here?"

"Blood!" said the Frenchwoman; "where did you cut yourself, Nettie? Let
me look!"

Which she did, with a face so anxious and eager that Nettie smiled at
her. Her own brow was as quiet and placid as ever it was.

"How did I get in here, Mrs. August?"

The Frenchwoman, however, did not answer her. Instead of which she went
to her cupboard and got a cup and spoon, and then from a little saucepan
on the stove dipped out some _riz-au-gras_ again.

"What did you have for dinner, Nettie? you did not tell me."

"Not much--I wasn't hungry," said Nettie. "Oh, I must get up and go home
to mother."

"You shall eat something first," said her friend; and she raised
Nettie's head upon another pillow, and began to feed her with the
spoon. "It is good for you. You must take it. Where is your father?
Don't talk, but tell me. I will do everything right."

"He is at work on Mr. Jackson's new house."

"Is he there to-day?"

"Yes."

Madame Auguste gave her all the "broth" in the cup, then bade her
keep still, and went to the shop window. It was time for the men to be
quitting work, she knew; she watched for the carpenters to come,--if
they were not gone by already!--how should she know? Even as she thought
this, a sound of rude steps and men's voices came from down the road;
and the Frenchwoman went to her door and opened it. The men came along,
a scattered group of four or five.

"Is Mr. Mat'ieson there?" she said. Madame Auguste hardly knew him by
sight. "Men, I say! is Mr. Mat'ieson there?"

"George, that's you; you're wanted," said one of the group, looking
back; and a fine-looking tall man paused at Madame's threshold.

"Are you Mr. Mat'ieson?" said the Frenchwoman.

"Yes, ma'am. That's my name."

"Will you come in? I have something to speak to you. Your little
daughter Nettie is very ill."

"Ill!" exclaimed the man. "Nettie!--Where is she?"

"She is here. Hush! you must not say nothing to her, but she is very
ill. She is come fainting at my door, and I have got her in here; but
she wants to go home, and I think you had better tell her she will not
go home, but she will stay here with me to-night."

"Where is she?" said Mr. Mathieson; and he stepped in with so little
ceremony that the mistress of the house gave way before him. He looked
round the shop.

"She is not here--you shall see her--but you must not tell her she is
ill," said the Frenchwoman, anxiously.

"Where is she?" repeated Mr. Mathieson, with a tone and look which made
Madame Auguste afraid he would burst the doors if she did not open them.
She opened the inner door without further preparation, and Mr. Mathieson
walked in. By the fading light he saw Nettie lying on the floor at his
feet. He was thoroughly himself now; sobered in more ways than one. He
stood still when he had got there, and spoke not a word.

"Father," said Nettie, softly.

He stooped down over her. "What do you want, Nettie?"

"Can't I go home?"

"She must better not go home to-night," began Madame Auguste, earnestly,
"it is so wet and cold! She will stay here with me to-night, Mr.
Mat'ieson. You will tell her that it is best."

But Nettie said, "_Please_ let me go home! mother will be so troubled."
She spoke little, for she felt weak; but her father saw her very eager
in the request. He stooped and put his strong arms under her, and lifted
her up.

"Have you got anything to put over her?" he said, looking round the
room. "I'll fetch it back."

Seeing that the matter was quite taken out of her hands, the kind little
Frenchwoman was very quick in her arrangements. She put on Nettie's head
a warm hood of her own; then round her and over her she wrapped a thick
woollen counterpane, that to be sure would have let no snow through if
the distance to be travelled had been twice as far. As she folded and
arranged the thick stuff round Nettie's head, so as to shield even her
face from the outer air, she said, half whispering,

"I would not tell nothing to mother about your lip; it is not much. I
wish I could keep you. Now she is ready, Mr. Mat'ieson."

And Mr. Mathieson stalked out of the house and strode along the road
with firm, swift steps, till, past Jackson's, and past the turning, he
came to his own door, and carried Nettie upstairs. He never said a word
the whole way. Nettie was too muffled up and too feeble to speak; so the
first word was when he had come in and sat down in a chair, which he
did with Nettie still in his arms. Mrs. Mathieson, standing white and
silent, waited to see what was the matter; she had no power to ask a
question. Her husband unfolded the counterpane that was wrapped round
Nettie's head; and there she was, looking very like her usual self,
only exceedingly pale. As soon as she caught sight of her mother's
face, Nettie would have risen and stood up, but her father's arms held
her fast. "What do you want, Nettie?" he asked. It was the first word.

"Nothing, father," said Nettie, "only lay me on the bed, please; and
then you and mother have supper."

Mr. Mathieson took her to the bed and laid her gently down, removing the
wet counterpane which was round her.

"What is the matter?" faltered Mrs. Mathieson.

"Nothing much, mother," said Nettie, quietly; "only I was a little ill.
Won't you bake the waffles and have supper?"

"What will _you_ have?" said her father.

"Nothing--I've had something. I feel nicely now," said Nettie. "Mother,
won't you have supper, and let me see you?"

Mrs. Mathieson's strength had well-nigh deserted her; but Nettie's
desire was urgent, and seeing that her husband had seated himself by the
bed-side, and seemed to have no idea of being anywhere but at home that
evening, she at length gathered up her faculties to do what was the best
thing to be done, and went about preparing the supper. Nettie's eyes
watched her, and Mr. Mathieson, when he thought himself safe, watched
_her_. He did not look like the same man, so changed and sobered was
the expression of his face. Mrs. Mathieson was devoured by fear, even
in observing this; but Nettie was exceedingly happy. She did not feel
anything but weakness; and she lay on her pillow watching the waffles
baked and sugared, and then watching them eaten, wondering and rejoicing
within herself at the way in which her father had been brought to eat
his supper there at home after all. She was the only one that enjoyed
anything, though her father and mother ate to please her. Mrs. Mathieson
had asked an account of Nettie's illness, and got a very unsatisfactory
one. She had been faint, her husband said; he had found her at Mrs.
Auguste's, and brought her home; that was about all.

After supper he came and sat by Nettie again, and said she was to sleep
there, and he would go up and take Nettie's place in the attic. Nettie
in vain said she was well enough to go upstairs; her father cut the
question short, and bade Mrs. Mathieson go up and get anything Nettie
wanted. When she had left the room he stooped his head down to Nettie
and said low,

"What was that about your lip?"

Nettie started: she thought he would fancy it had it been done, if done
at all, when he gave her the push at the frame-house. But she did not,
dare not, answer. She said it was only that she had found a little blood
on her handkerchief, and supposed she might have cut her lip when she
fell on Mrs. Auguste's threshold, when she had fainted.

"Show me your handkerchief," said her father. Nettie obeyed. He looked
at it, and looked close at her lips, to find where they might have been
wounded; and Nettie was sorry to see how much he felt, for he even
looked pale himself as he turned away from her. But he was as gentle and
kind as he could be! Nettie had never seen him so; and when he went off
up to bed, and Nettie was drawn into her mother's arms to go to sleep,
she was very, very happy. But she did not tell her hopes or her joys to
her mother; she only told her thanks to the Lord; and that she did till
she fell asleep.

The next morning Nettie was well enough to get up and dress herself.
That was all she was suffered to do by father or mother. Mr. Mathieson
sent Barry for water and wood, and himself looked after the fire while
Mrs. Mathieson was busy; all the rest he did was to take Nettie in his
arms and sit holding her till breakfast was ready. He did not talk, and
he kept Barry quiet: he was like a different man. Nettie, feeling indeed
very weak, could only sit with her head on her father's shoulder, and
wonder, and think, and repeat quiet prayers in her heart. She was very
pale yet, and it distressed Mr. Mathieson to see that she could not eat.
So he laid her on the bed when he was going to his work, and told her
she was to stay there and be still, and he would bring her something
good when he came home.

He was as good as his word, and at night brought home some oysters, to
tempt Nettie's appetite; but it was much more to her that he stayed
quietly at home, and never made a move towards going out. Eating was not
in Nettie's line just now; the kind little Frenchwoman had been to see
her in the course of the day, and brought some delicious rolls and a jug
of _riz-au-gras_, which was what seemed to suit Nettie's appetite best
of all.




CHAPTER VIII.

_THE GOLDEN CITY._

  "Blessed are the peacemakers."--_Matt._ v. 9.


Several days went on. She did not feel ill, and she was a little
stronger; but appetite and colour were wanting. Her father would not
let her do anything; he would not let her go up to her garret to sleep,
though Nettie pleaded for it, fearing he must be uncomfortable. He said
it was fitter for him than for her, though he made faces about it. He
always came home and stayed at home now, and especially attended to
Nettie; his wages came home too, and he brought every day something to
try to tempt her to eat; and he was quiet and grave and kind--not the
same person.

Mrs. Mathieson, in the midst of all her distress about Nettie, began
to draw some free breaths. But her husband thought only of his
child--unless, perhaps, of himself--and drew none. Regularly after
supper he would draw Nettie to his arms, and sit with her head upon
his shoulder; silent generally, only he would sometimes ask her what
she would like. The first time he put this inquiry when Mr. Lumber
was out of the way, Nettie answered by asking him to read to her. Mr.
Mathieson hesitated a little, not unkindly, and then read--a chapter
in the Bible, of course, for Nettie wished to hear nothing else. And
after that he often read to her; for Mr. Lumber kept up his old habits
and preferred livelier company, and so was always out in the evenings.

So several days passed; and when Saturday came, Mr. Mathieson lost half
a day's work, and took a long walk to a farm where the people kept
pigeons, and brought home one for Nettie's supper. However, she could
fancy but little of it.

"What shall I do for you?" said her father. "You go round like a shadow,
and you don't eat much more. What shall I do that you would like?"

This time there was nobody in the room. Nettie lifted her head from his
shoulders and met his eyes,

"If you would come to Jesus, father!"

"What does that mean, Nettie? You know I don't know."

"It means, father, that Jesus is holding out His hand with a promise to
you. Now, if you will take the promise,--that is all."

"What is the promise, Nettie?"

Nettie waited, gathered breath, for the talk made her heart beat, and
then said, "'This is the promise that He hath promised us, even eternal
life.'"

"How can a sinful man take such a promise?" said Mr. Mathieson, with
suppressed feeling. "That is for people like you, Nettie, not me."

"Oh, Jesus, has bought it!" cried Nettie; "it's free. It's without
price. You may have it if you'll believe in Him and love Him, father.--I
can't talk."

She had talked too much, or the excitement had been too strong for her.
Her words were broken off by coughing, and she remarked that her lip
must have bled again. Her father laid her on the bed, and from that time
for a number of days she was kept as quiet as possible; for her strength
had failed anew, and yet more than at first.

For two weeks she hardly moved from the bed. But except that she was so
very pale, she did not look very ill; her face wore just its own patient
and happy expression. Her father would not now let her talk to him; but
he did everything she asked. He read to her in the Bible; Nettie would
turn over the leaves to the place she wanted, and then point it out to
him with a look of life, and love, and pleasure, that were like a whole
sermon; and her father read first that sermon and then the chapter. He
went to church as she asked him; and without her asking him, after the
first Sunday. Nettie stayed at home on the bed, and sang psalms in her
heart.

After those two weeks there was a change for the better. Nettie felt
stronger, looked more as she used to look, and got up and even went
about a little. The weather was changing too, now. April days were
growing soft and green; trees budding and grass freshening up, and
birds all alive in the branches; and above all, the air and the light,
the wonderful soft breath of spring, and sunshine of spring, made
people forget that winter had ever been harsh or severe.

Nettie went out and took little walks in the sun which seemed to do her
good; and she begged so hard to be allowed to go to her garret again,
that her father took pity on her, sent Mr. Lumber away, and gave her
her old nice little room on the same floor with the others. Her mother
cleaned it and put it in order, and Nettie felt too happy when she found
herself mistress of it again, and possessed of a quiet place where she
could read and pray alone. With windows open, how sweetly the spring
walked in there, and made it warm, and bright, and fragrant too!

Nettie wished she could sing, for she had often seen singing comfort
her mother; but she had not the power to-day. She gave her the best she
could. Her words, however, constantly carried hurt and healing together
to her mother's mind. But when Nettie went on to repeat softly the verse
of a hymn that follows, she was soothed, notwithstanding the hinted
meaning in the words. So sweet was the trust of the hymn, so unruffled
the trust of the speaker. The words were from a little bit of a book of
translations of German hymns which Mr. Folke, her Sunday-school teacher,
had brought her, and which was never out of Nettie's hand.

  "As GOD leads me, so my heart
    In faith shall rest.
  No grief nor fear my soul shall part
    From JESUS' breast.

  "In sweet belief I know
  What way my life doth go;
  Since GOD permitteth so,
  That must be best."

Slowly she said the words, with her usual sober, placid face; and Mrs.
Mathieson was mute.

For some weeks, as the spring breathed warmer and warmer, Nettie
revived; so much that her mother at times felt encouraged about her. Mr.
Mathieson was never deceived. Whether his former neglect of his child
had given him particular keenness of vision in all that concerned her
now, or for whatever reason, _he_ saw well enough, and saw constantly,
that Nettie was going to leave him. There was never a wish of hers
uncared for now; there was not a straw suffered to lie in her path,
that he could take out of it. He went to church, and he read at home;
he changed his behaviour to her mother as well as to herself, and he
brought Barry to his bearings. What more did Nettie want?

One Sunday, late in May, her father came into her room to see her. He
kissed her, and said a few words, and then went to the window and stood
there looking out. Both were silent for some time, while the birds sang
on.

"Father," said Nettie.

He turned instantly, and asked her what she wanted.

"Father," said Nettie, "the streets of the heavenly city are all of
gold."

"Well," said he, meeting her grave eyes, "and what then, Nettie?"

"Only I was thinking, if the _streets_ are gold, how clean must the feet
be that walk on them!"

He knew what her intent eyes meant, and he sat down by her bed-side and
laid his face in his hands. "I am a sinful man, Nettie!" he said.

"Father, 'this is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners.'"

"I don't deserve He should save me, Nettie."

"Well, father, ask Him to save you, _because_ you don't deserve it."

"What sort of a prayer would that be?"

"The right one, father; for Jesus does deserve it, and for His sake
is the only way. If you deserved it, you wouldn't want Jesus; but
now '_He_ is our peace.' Oh, father, listen, listen to what the Bible
says." She had been turning the leaves of her Bible, and read low and
earnestly, "'Now we are ambassadors for God, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.'
Oh, father, aren't you willing to be reconciled to Him?"

"God knows I am willing!" said Mr. Mathieson.

"_He_ is willing, I am sure," said Nettie.

There was a long silence. Mr. Mathieson never stirred. Nor Nettie
hardly. The words were true of her,--"He that believeth shall not make
haste." She waited, looking at him. Then he said, "What must I do,
Nettie?"

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ."

"How, child?"

"Father, the best way is to ask Him, and He will tell you how. If you
are only willing to be His servant, if you are willing to give yourself
to the Lord Jesus--are you willing, father?"

"I am willing--anything!--if He will have me," said Mr. Mathieson.

"Then go, father!" said Nettie, eagerly, "go and ask Him, and He will
teach you how; He will! He has promised. Go, father, and ask the
Lord--will you? Go now."

Her father remained still a moment--then he rose up and went out of
the room, and she heard his steps going up to the unused attic. Nettie
crossed her hands upon her breast, and smiled. She was too much
exhausted to pray otherwise than with a thought.

Then slumber stole over her, and she slept sweetly and quietly while the
hours of the summer afternoon rolled away. Her mother watched beside her
for a long while before she awoke, and during that time read surely in
Nettie's delicate cheek and too delicate colour what was the sentence
of separation. She read it, and smothered the cry of her heart, for
Nettie's sake.

The sun was descending toward the western hill country, and long level
rays of light were playing in the tree-tops, when Nettie awoke.

"Are you there, mother?" she said--"and is the Sunday so near over? How
I have slept!"

"How do you feel, dear?"

"Why, I feel well," said Nettie. "It has been a good day. The gold is
all in the air here--not in the streets." She had half raised herself,
and was sitting looking out of the window.

"Do you think of that city all the time?" inquired Mrs. Mathieson, half
jealously.

"Mother," said Nettie, slowly, still looking out at the sunlight, "would
you be very sorry, and very much surprised, if I were to go there before
long?"

"I should not be very much surprised, Nettie," answered her mother, in a
tone that told all the rest. Her child's eye turned to her sorrowfully
and understandingly.

"You'll not be very long before you'll be there too," she said. "Now
kiss me, mother."

Could Mrs. Mathieson help it? She took Nettie in her arms, but instead
of the required kiss, there came a burst of passion that bowed her head
in convulsive grief against her child's breast.

Ashamed of her giving way, Mrs. Mathieson checked herself and dried her
tears. Nettie lay down wearily.

"I will stay here, mother," she said, "till tea is ready; and then I
will come."

Mrs. Mathieson went to attend to it.

When Nettie went into the other room, her father was sitting there. She
said nothing, however, and even for some time did not look in his face
to see what he might have to say to her. She took a cup of tea and a
biscuit, and ate an egg that her mother had boiled for her. It was when
supper was over, and they had moved from the table, and Mrs. Mathieson
was busy about, that Nettie turned her eyes once more upon her father,
with their soft, full inquiry. He looked grave, subdued, tender--she
had heard that in his voice already; not as she had ever seen him look
before. He met her eyes and answered them.

"I understand it now, Nettie," he said; then drew her close within his
arms; and without one word Nettie sat there, till for very happiness and
weariness she fell asleep, and he carried her to her room.

There was a great calm fell upon the family for a little time thereafter.
It was like one of those spring days that were past--full of misty
light, and peace, and hope, and promise. It was a breath of rest.

But they knew it would end--for a time; and one summer day the end came.
It was a Sunday again, and again Nettie was lying on her bed, enjoying
in her weakness the loveliness of the air and beauty without. Her mother
was with her, and knew that she had been failing very fast for some
days. Nettie knew it too.

"How soon do you think father will be home?" she said.

"Not before another hour, I think," said Mrs. Mathieson. "Why, what of
it, Nettie?"

"Nothing----" said Nettie, doubtfully. "I'd like him to come."

"It won't be long," said her mother.

"Mother, I am going to give you my little dear hymn-book," said Nettie
presently; "and I want to read you a hymn now, and then you will think
of me when you read it. May I?"

"Read," said Mrs. Mathieson; and she put up her hand to hide her face
from Nettie. Nettie did not look, however; her eyes were on her hymn,
and she read it, low and sweetly--very sweetly--through. There was no
tremor in her voice, but now and then a little accent of joy or a shade
of tenderness.

Mrs. Mathieson's head bowed as the hymn went on, but she dared not give
way to tears, and Nettie's manner half awed and half charmed her into
quietness. When the reading ceased, and Mrs. Mathieson felt that she
could look toward Nettie again, she saw that the book had fallen from
her hand, and that she was almost fainting. Alarmed, instantly she
called for help, and got one of the inmates of the house to go after
Mr. Mathieson. But Nettie sank so fast, they were afraid he would not
come in time. The messenger came back without having been able to find
him; for after the close of the services in the church Mr. Mathieson had
gone out of his way on an errand of kindness. Nettie herself was too low
to ask for him, if indeed she was conscious he was not there. They could
not tell; she lay without taking any notice.

But just as the last rays of the sun were bright in the leaves of the
trees and on the hills in the distance, Mr. Mathieson's step was heard.
One of the neighbours met him and told him what he must expect; and
he came straight to Nettie's room. And when he bent down over her and
spoke, Nettie knew his voice, and opened her eyes, and once more smiled.
It was like a smile from another country. Her eyes were fixed on him.
Mr. Mathieson bent yet nearer and put his lips to hers; then he tried to
speak.

"My little peacemaker, what shall I do without you?"

Nettie drew a long, long breath. "Peace--is--made!" she slowly said.

And the peacemaker was gone.

  "There's a rest for little children.
    Above the bright blue sky,
  Who love the blessed Saviour,
    And to His Father cry,
  A rest from every trouble,
    From sin and danger free,
  There every little pilgrim
    Shall rest eternally.

  "There's a home for little children,
    Above the bright blue sky,
  Where JESUS reigns in glory,
    A home of peace and joy;
  No home on earth is like it,
    Nor can with it compare,
  For every one is happy,
    Nor can be happier there.

  "There are crowns for little children,
    Above the bright blue sky;
  And all who look to JESUS
    Shall wear them by-and-bye,
  Yea, crowns of brightest glory,
    Which He shall sure bestow
  On all who love the Saviour
    And walk with Him below."




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

Hyphenation is inconsistent, and some of the punctuation is non-standard.
The helpful French lady appears as Madame Auguste in the narrative,
but as Mrs. August when she is addressed in English. One instance of
Mathison was changed to match all the Mathiesons.

One additional change was made to the text:

 "That would make the fire worse," said one of girls.
 now reads:
 "That would make the fire worse," said one of the girls.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Nettie, by 
Susan Bogert Warner and Anna Bartlett Warner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE NETTIE ***

***** This file should be named 35983.txt or 35983.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/9/8/35983/

Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
