The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Voyage of the Oregon from San Francisco
to Santiago in 1898, by R. Cross

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Voyage of the Oregon from San Francisco to Santiago in 1898

Author: R. Cross

Release Date: June 7, 2008 [EBook #25723]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGE OF THE OREGON IN 1898 ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






THE VOYAGE OF THE
_OREGON_
FROM SAN FRANCISCO
TO SANTIAGO IN
1898


_AS TOLD BY_
ONE OF THE CREW



_PRIVATELY PRINTED_
THE MERRYMOUNT PRESS
_BOSTON_
1908

[_One hundred and twenty-five copies printed_]




To the Reader


_Almost ten years have passed since the country followed, in scanty
telegram from port to port, the Oregon speeding down one side of a
continent and up the other to Bahia; then came two anxious, silent
weeks when apprehension and fear pictured four Spanish cruisers with a
pack of torpedo boats sailing out into the west athwart the lone ship's
course, the suspense ending only when tidings came of her arrival at
Jupiter Inlet; then off Santiago, after a month of waiting, there is
the outcoming of Cervera's squadron, when this splendid ship, with
steam all the time up, leaps to the front of her sisters of the fleet,
like an unleashed hound, and joins the historic company of the Bon
Homme Richard, the Constitution, the Hartford, in our naval annals.
From the start at the Golden Gate to the beaching of the Colon is a
succession of events full of thrilling merit and vitality which
official bickerings and envyings cannot change or obscure._

_The story has been told from the standpoint of the quarter-deck, the
court room, and the department bureau. Here we have the artless journal
of an unlettered sailor, written between decks, without the least
notion that it would ever be read apart from his own family circle. The
pages of his record give an insight into the mutual regard and
confidence existing between the captain and his crew which made the
voyage the memorable achievement that it was. Admiral Clark would be
made of stolid stuff were he indifferent to the enthusiasm and loyalty
manifest in the narrative in various ways, in none, however, more
hearty and sincere than in the endearing designations of the "old gent"
and "the old man." He was in fact fifty-four years of age when he
became captain of the Oregon. Shortly before, he had been on special
duty in the North Pacific at the head of a fleet of seven men-of-war,
at that time the largest cruising fleet in our navy since the conflict
with the Confederacy. Starting as midshipman at the Naval Academy in_
1860, _he had seen thirty-eight years of active and varied service in
all seas. In the contest with Spain the commanders of the various
warships were his associates at the academy. Sampson had been his
instructor there; Gridley, who opened the battle of Manila, and Cook,
who received the surrender of the Colon, were classmates; and Dayton,
who rendered distinguished service at San Juan, was a relative. In the
transition from wood to iron in naval architecture he has had command
in every type of fighting craft beginning with the wooden Ossipee, when
he took part at Mobile Bay in ramming the ironclad Tennessee, and, as
ensign in charge of the forward guns, was the first to exchange words
with the latter's commander as he came out of the casemate to surrender
his ship, and ending with the Oregon._

_The narrative which follows of the voyage from San Francisco to
Santiago in_ 1898 _was called to light by a communication of Admiral
Clark to the press in the winter of_ 1907 _relating to the Straits of
Magellan. The writer of the narrative, who was a member of the Oregon's
crew, sent it to his sisters through whom in consequence of reading the
Admiral's mention of that ship's passage of the Straits, it came to
him. The Admiral in turn showed it to friends, who insisted that copies
should be printed for private distribution._

JOHN ADAMS AIKEN

_Greenfield, Massachusetts_
_February_ 29, 1908




The Voyage of the OREGON


So we started on the 19th of March and I will try and give you some
idea of our trip on this side of the U.S. Capt McCommick got sick and
had to be releived to go on sick leif. Capt Clark was in comand of the
Monteray at the time and he was a young Capt too. there was no other
one around there at that time, so he was detailed to take comand of the
Oregon and a prowed man he was too, and we wer a prowed crew along with
him. he was glad he got the ship and we wer glad we got him. we knew he
was a good Seaman. any way he called us all aft on the quarter deck and
read out his orders and told us that we wer going towards south
America. I will now try and give you the trip.

_March_ 19. 1898 Up anchor at 8 A.M. in San Francisco Bay. I had the 8
to 12 watch and we past through the Golden Gate at 9.15 A.M. and left
the Fairwell Bouy at 10.5 A.M. and shaped our course for Callao, Peru,
it being S.E. 1/2 E, and at the same time we drop over the Patent Log
in the Briny. the Capt gave orders to give 75 turns and that brought
her out about 11.5 knots. Every thing is runing smooth and all Hunk.

_March_ 20. Sliding along at 11.8 knots gate. Every thing working
beautyfull. nothing of interest going on, except the fine Wether.

_March_ 21. Changed course at 10. A.M. to S.E. Will not put down any
thing for some time to come as there is nothing unusal going on, But I
wonder if we will get there to catch up with the Band Wagon.

_April_ 4. Arived at Callao, Peru, 5.30 A.M., very pleasant trip all
the way down the coast, we are doing quick work so far. started to coal
ship at 8 A.M. and as soon as we get enough on board we will pull right
out for the straights of Magellan and there join the Marietta, our
little Gun Boat, which will scout the straights for us in case there is
a Spanish Torpedo Boat in one of the Many Coves. She can go in shallow
water as she is a light draft boat and at the same time order coal for
us.

We have allready made one of the grandest runs on record. Just think of
it, a First Class Battle Ship making 4800 miles in just 16 days and
used 900 Tons of Coal, That being the longest trip on record for a
First Class Battle Ship.

_April_ 5. We are now laying over an old city in Peru. they say when
some of the ships hoist there anchor they some times rais some of the
old houses or part of them with the anchor. This old place is some 109
years old, the Old Callao, I mean. 109 years ago they had an Earthquake
and Tidle Wave hear togather and did up the city. The public hear speak
nothing but Spanish and the Capt thinks there might be som sympathizers
amongst Them, so we are keeping the strickest Kind of watch on the
ship. We have two steam cutters pattroling the ship all night and men
station in the fighting tops as sharp shooters. the steam cutters are
armed with two automatic 22 m.m. Rifles, so that would more than be a
match for a ordinary Torpedo Boat, and while all the Post on Deck were
Double we consider our selves pretty safe. They are puting coal on
board as fast as they can, working night and day to get it all on. we
are going to take a big lot this time.

_April_ 6. Pay day today. put on Sea stors today along with the coal,
it all gos togather. But what is the diferance, this is War times and
we are trying to get in it and I think we will if we get a show. I
bought a nice pair of shoes today for 3.50 in U.S. Gold. there is no
liberty to any one hear so we have to buy something that is some good
to us. Expect to coal ship all night so as to pull out to morrow.

_April_ 7. Got all the coal on this morning at 4 A.M. there is about
1750 tons on now, never had so much on before. got 100 tons on deck in
sacks. we are knocking some of the coal dust off the sides. She is a
very dirty ship now and expect to remain so for a long time to come.
There is some talk of a Spanish Gun Boat or a Torpedo Boat in the
Straights waiting for us. But I think that will be all right when the
Marietta gets there to patrole the place for us. We expect to go out to
night some time. 7 P.M. left Port. The Capt dont know wether to go
round the Horn or not. But if we go, as the Dutchman says By the Horn
around, we will get a shaking up. But every body seems to think we can
take care of our selves where ever we go. Capt Clark is all right, we
dont think he is afraid of the whole Spanish Navy. the wether is very
fogy. Expect it to lift when we get a little ways.

                     *      *      *      *      *

_April_ 9. Alls Well, every thing doing fine.

_April_ 10. Just came on watch; have all four boilers on now and we are
peging along at a 13.7 and a 14 knot gate. you dont know you are at sea
in this ship if you would stop between Decks. guess there is not much
doing to day, so I will steal forward for a while the old gent sleeps a
little. I forgot to speak of having a little practis with the 6
pounders. They threw over Boxes and barrels and as we would get away
from them we would fire on them for Torpedo Boats. we did some good
shooting. All the Marines Man the seccondary Battry. The Capt got the
chief engineer to fix the 8 inch turets to turn in Board 9 more degrees
so as to shoot over the stern of the ship. So that would bring to bear
on one point 2, 13 inch Guns 4, 8 inch Guns 2, 6 inch Guns and six 6
Pounders aft, and the same forward. We could shoot for a Broad side 4,
13 inch 4, 8 inch 2, 6 inch and about 12, 6 Pounders on either side.

Of corse this is Sunday and we all ought to be good. But we will be as
good as we can By having a Gen feild day and clean up a little, as this
is the first chance we have had to do any scrubing since we left San
Francisco, Cal. I think we will meet the Marietta in the Straights of
Magellan. we have found some grate Bars for her under the coal dust. We
all think Capt Clark is going to be a ring tail snorter for fighting. I
dont think it will be easy to whip him, he seems to be so quick to
catch on to every little thing, he is all over the ship at once and he
talks to every body, stops any one to ask them any thing he wants to
know about the ship. he is very quick to take the advantage of every
little thing.

_April_ 11. Very heavy wether. Wind Blowing Great Guns and a head sea.
But we are Bucking it and making 11.6 knots. the Capt dont think we
will run up against any thing in the shape of a Torpedo Boat in the
Straights. We had some more Practis today with the 6 Pounders and did
some good work. I think we could make it very interesting for a Torpedo
Boat. I dont see how they could get at us, unless it was in the night
and then there would have to be somthing the matter with our search
lights and all hands on Board would have to have the "Buck Feaver."

_April_ 12. We lost a little today on account of the forward 13 inch
Turet, somthing got Jamed. all going well once more, and still bucking
a head sea and making 11.7 knots right along. 4 P.M. Heavy wind has
turned into a gale, but she is like a Duck on a Mill Pond and still
making 10 knots, Gale or no Gale. she has not roled over 10 degrees
since we left Port Orchard, Wash.

_April_ 15. Whooping her up for all she is worth, want to make all she
can. Wether is fine but quite Cold. Making all the way from 14 to 15
knots.

_April_ 16. Everything is still doing well, and still going a mill
tail. Passed Smiths Straights the first part of this morning, early,
and in the fog that has Just come on we are still going it. the fog
raised for a while and showed us the Destination Island, and then we
wer shure we had only 30 miles to go to get in the Straights. Just at
Dark we droped our mud hook in just 45 fathoms of water in the entrence
of the Straights of Magellan. 9.45 P.M. had the 8 to 12 watch and She
more than blew. I thought the ship would drift. But she held on like
grim Deth to a dead nigger. The wind Blowed so hard I expected to be
lifted off my feet.

_April_ 17. Making all posable speed to Sandy Point, making about 15
knots ever since we started this morning. 12 O clock Midday, there is
some of the most beautyfull and grandest sights I have ever had the
pleasure to look upon. I am shure if I could only write on the subject
I could make it very interesting. I never seen such beautyfull wild
nature in all my travels; there is mountain after mountain of Glacier
and they seem to have all the colors of the rainbow, it was a little
cold too and the whole Mountains sparkled like diamonds. 6. P.M. drop
anchor in the Harber of Sandy Point, Chili. Had the public bin able to
see us, They would not stop runing for the next week to come, for we
cleard ship for action and had the guns all loaded up and ready for
buisness and to Blaze away at any thing that looked as thoe it wanted
to fight. Capt Clark belives in for warned for armed, and takes no
chances. had the two Steam Cutters patroling the ship as usual.

She made one of the grandest runs on record, for 11 hours making an
average of 15-1/2 knots; it knocks the Worlds record sky high. Just
think of a first Class Battle Ship making 15-1/2 knots for 11 straight
hours on a straight away run, and we all think she could beat that
time. But we had over the bow 2 anchors with the flukes of both in the
water 3 feet. I am sure that held her Back 2 tenths of a knot. And the
Marietta is not hear. the Capt dont know what has becom of her.

_April_ 18. Well the Marietta is hear this morning, she came in at
12.15 this morning. She was in the straights when we past her, she was
laying off in one of the coves waiting for us, the man on lookout
sighted us as we pased her, and told his capt and he said let her go,
we will up anchor and overhall her in a short time. it hapened that the
lookout was on board of the Oregon and he told his Capt that the
Marietta could never catch the Oregon. Well any way she came in a
little affter midnight.

The first thing this morning we started to coal up. I havent found out
how many tons we are going to take hear. But the price is $25 a ton. I
think we will take about 800 tons. all the men on the Marietta say they
had a very rough trip. We are in a great rush to get out of hear. Capt
Clark asked Capt Simons if he had any towing Bits. Looks as thoe we
were going to snake him along with us. I am detailed to go into the
fighting top to night as capt of one Pounder and look out, we have a
double watch on now all the time and it makes the Duty very hard thies
war times.

_April_ 19. Still coaling up, was working all night to night, expect to
be through to night sometime. Puting on sea stors along with the coal.
Meat, Can goods, coal dust, all mixed up togather. What is the
defirance, it all goes thies times. The Marietta had some trouble in
geting coal to day. She only got 40 tons since 1 A.M. this morning, so
Capt Clark ordered him to go along side of the Coal Hulk and take all
he wanted, for Capt sais we must have the coal and therefor must take
it as we are going out of hear to morrow. 3.30 P.M. there was an
Argentine Gun Boat came in Port and I would not be suprised to see a
scrap hear before we left. Chili and Argentine are in hot disput over
this place, it seems they both clame it to there Boundry line. Chili
sent a company of Soldiers hear the 18th and they expect a Transport
with som Soldiers from Argentine to night som time, so I for one would
like to see a good scrap of som kind for an appetizer for us, Just to
take the rough edge off you know. we are standing by our Guns all the
time and sleep by them by night. While the Jackies coal ship all hands
are doing there part and there is no fudging going on. of corse there
is all kinds of War talk in the air.

_April_ 20. At 12.30 A.M. still coaling up. Every thing working smooth
and nothing to stop, it is a beautyfull night and the Southern Cross
looms up with more beauty than I ever seen befor. But the ships bum
Boat is all right too, she loomed up with a big ketle of hot Steaming
cocoa, Just the thing a man wants when he has the mid watch. the wether
is very cold down hear. a few of the men is going ashore to morrow. I
dont think I will be able to go as I will have the afternoon watch, any
way I dont care much as I am use to the ship now. I could stay hear for
a year. I wish we wer around to Key West so as to be with the Band
wagon when she starts. Mr. Giles, Midshipman, is a very sick man, he
was taken ill in the Cabin this morning. I went for the Doctor for him
at 1.45 A.M. Doc said he had a hemorrhage of the lungs caused by
concussion. 3. A.M. he is asleep and doing fine now. I woulden like to
see him die, he is a fine fellow. 3.45 A.M. coal all on board. 4.30
P.M. the Capt is on the warpath, he is mader than a wet hen for he
tryed to get out of hear by 2 P.M. to day, But could not on the account
of the Marietta having some trouble with her coal, so we both go
tomorrow morning at daybreak.

_April_ 21. Called all hands at 5.30 A.M. and up anchor at 6. A.M. I
called the old man at 5.40 A.M. Signaled over to pullout and we are
tailing on behind untill we get out of the Straights, going about 10
knots; at 6 Bells met a steamer Bound for Klondyke, we drop a whale
boat and sent our Boarding officer to find out the news if there was
any But was disapointed. She had no news, she was 15 days from Rio de
Janeiro. 7.30 P.M. All is going well. The Marietta is astern now and
likely to remain so untill we get in the next Port. we past another
steamer about 3 P.M. and when I go on watch to night at 8 I will try
and find out something about her. Came off at 12 midnight and she
signaled to us no news of War. We have to go slow on account of the
Marietta. had some targate practis today with all the Guns. We travel
at nights with all lights out now adays so as not to let any thing slip
up on us, and at the same time slip up on them.

_April_ 22. Wind is very high, lost a life Boat this morning at 5.20
A.M. from the after Davits, good thing the wind is head on, the Sea is
runing high. 8 P.M. Sea and wind has gon down considerable. Making
about 10-1/2 knots. Ellis is sick poor man, I am standing his watch to
night. 11.45 P.M. going about the same and all is well.

_April_ 23. I think we will have a dash of Gen Quarters, Just to shake
the Boys up. the old man is anxious to have targate Practis, he
believes this ship whips the shoes off any thing that floats in the
line of Battle ships, of corse Baring a Torpedo if one should hapen to
hit, and I think the old man is right too, for this crew feals scrapy
now. I think we would fight fer Keeps. Had Gen Quarters in the morning
and Church in the afternoon.

_April_ 24. All is well, at 12 O clock noon to day we wer in Lat. 44°
23m and Lon 57° 48m. had some fire drill to day mixed with a little
collision drill.

_April_ 25. 4 A.M. Just came on watch and I am going on deck to get a
cup of cocoa to wake me up abit. the old man is in the Chart house
snoozing, so I guess it is safe to go. Every thing has settled down to
the same old thing except when we have some Targate Practis By throwing
boxes over board.

_April_ 26. 8 A.M. All is well, same thing, Making 10-1/2 sometimes 11
knots. Had clear ship for action today.

_April_ 27. Every body begins to feal the trip now, geting tiresome
now. since they have taken all of our ditty Boxes and benches and all
extra mess chests and stored them away, we have no place to sit down
except on deck and let our feet hang over. then the men forward cant
get enough water to keep themselves clean. I am more lucky than most of
them for I have a chance to steal a Bucketful one every night. our cook
is no good, he makes sour Bread and would make good schrapnel for
clearing the decks, and of corse your humble servant has to chew Hard
Tack. had more Targate practis to day.

_April_ 28. good stiff Breeze to day. Expect to have more targate
practis to day with ful charges of amanition; no practis, wind too
high.

_April_ 29. good day to day, guess we will have it to day, no we dont
have it. the old man has changed his mind and we will try and make Port
to morrow.

_April_ 30. Started to pul out this morning at 5.30 A.M, useing forsed
draught, making 14.5 knots, going to try and make it by 4 P.M, have a
head wind and light head sea. Droped anchor at 3 P.M. in the beautyfull
harber of Rio de Janeiro, and befor the Mud hook struck the botom we
had the news that war was declared on the 21st of April 1898, the very
day we puled out of Sandy Point. as soon as every thing was put to
order we Broke out the Band to give us the Star Spangled Baner, and the
Crew diden do a thing But yell and whoop her up, so they had to play it
over 4 times. The Marietta got in at 7 P.M. The Forts at this place
were not going to let her in. But when they see her Signal they let her
pass O.K. started to coal up at 8.25 P.M. and we get out of hear as
soon as we can. I hear the Spanish has got one of our Merchant ships,
the Shanandore, loaded with English goods. I wonder how that is going
to com out. Every one on this ship is crasie to get at the Spanish.

_May_ 1. Just com on watch. Beautyfull morning and still coaling ship.
Hear is where you can get lots of sour frute and Bananas by the ship
load for a little mony. But we are not aloud to Buy any thing that
isent sour on account of Yellow Feaver at this place. The Brazilian
soldiers stop up all night to be up erly in the morning; they started
to give us Revelee about 3 O clock this morning, diden get through until
4 A.M. it sounds very pretty early in the morning when you are all
ready awake, and such a beautyfull morning as this is you can hear the
echo of the drums up in the hils far away. You would all most wish you
could stop hear all the time and be a Brazilian for good. But I coulden
leave my Dear land for all the pretty sights Ive seen togather.

_May_ 2. American Minerster Just com on board and told us the news of
the Battle of Manila, the Yanks did up every thing there. coal is
coming on very slow and the old man is geting ancious to get out.

_May_ 3. going out tomorrow morning at 6. A.M. The crew is very
enthusiastic over the war. got out this morning all right But going
slow. I think we are fooling around hear. Have Nictheroy as a transport
boat. She has 2000 tons of coal on Board for us and they say she is an
18 knoter.

_May_ 4. I guess the war is on for keeps now. We have com back to Rio
or near it to wate for a Spanish Torpedo Boat that has bin laying
around hear for the last 3 days and at the same time to take the
Nictheroy.

_May_ 5. lost some time waiting for the Nictheroy But she came along at
dark. the Marietta will look out for her and we will pull out for Key
West I think.

_May_ 6. Every thing doing well and making 10 and 11 knots right off
the reel now. at 8 P.M. the old man called all the Ward Room officers
in the Cabin and read the tellegrams to them from Washington Which wer
his sealed Orders and one of them reads like this: four armered
Crusiers left Cape de Verde at some date and 2 Torpedo Boats,
Destination unknown, and the old man is told to beware. The old man had
a consul of War to night, so if we have to scrap, we will have to cut a
lively gate for them. they say the Spanish is some Kind of a fighter
him self. But we all think we can show him a trick with a hole in it.
that was a great fight of the Manilla bay.

_May_ 7. Every thing doing well, except this morning at 4.50 A.M. Gen
Quarters sounded and there was a lively old time for a while. Every
body thought we wer in for it then and there. I cannot describe the
fealing of enthusiasm about the Decks. you see we had our orders to
send in a Gen alarm when ever any thing looked like a Manowar got in
sight. there was a little rain squall and some old sailing ship was in
it, and just as she cleared away our lookout sighted the ship and sent
in the alarm; it was the Capts orders to send in the alarm even if he
was not there as he would get there all right. at 9 A.M. the old man
called all hands to muster on the Quarter deck and told us the news he
had received at Rio: there was 4 first class cruisers and three Torpedo
Boats going to meet around hear some where and do us up. we all expect
they will if they can, But the pruf of the Puding is the eating of it
and we will have something to say about that. And after telling us
about the fleet that was going to whip the socks off us he made a
little speach to us; he said of corse it was his duty to the Goverment
to get the ship around on the other side and stear clear of the fleet
if posable. But in case he did meet the fleet he was sure Spain's
fighting efficiency on the sea would be demineshed. So we all gave him
three rousen Cheers and the old man Blushed, but he is a dandy Just the
same.

_May_ 8. got to Bahia, Bra. at 8.30 P.M. after making a good run and
having Targate practis with full charges of Powder, don some fine
shooting with the Big Guns. I dont think it will be a bit too healthy
for the Spanish to bump up against us, for we have a good eye. We put
in hear as an excuse to put on War paint saying our engines wer Brok
down and at the same time to get more coal if we can.

_May_ 9. Put on War paint to day and we are out for it now. we have the
ship cleared for action now for keeps. got some coal and fresh water,
filed up with every thing we wanted. at 8 P.M. the old man got telagram
and at 10 P.M. we wer on our corse for the West Indias.

_May_ 10. going along smooth and nothing doing.

_May_ 11. still expect to meet that fleet and if we do meet them there
is going to be a "Hot time in the old town to night."

_May_ 12. Every thing the same, some of us think we past through the
fleet last night, there wer several lights all around and acted Mighty
quer.

_May_ 13. Nothing doing and will wate untill we get in Port.

_May_ 18. got into Barbadoes at 4 A.M. this morning and found lots of
war talk going on; we are puting on coal Just now, expect to go out of
hear to morrow morning erly. 8 P.M. up anchor once more after geting
250 tons of coal on and ready for buisness. Guess the Spanish dont want
any of this craft, it seems we will get there without firering a shot.

_May_ 24. arived at Jupiter light house after making a flank movement
to the northard and not a ship to be seen.

_May_ 25. up anchor once more for Key West, got there on the 26th; of
corse the Capt dident know how things stud so he had to go slow. About
4.30 A.M. the man on the life Bouy gave the alarm, saying there was a
small dark objict coming this way; the Officer of the Deck roused up
the Capt and the next thing we knew Gen Quarters sounded. What should
it be But the tug with our Pilot on board for us, the "Hudson" was the
name of the tug.

_May_ 27. still puting on coal, expect to go down to Cuba with the New
York.

_June_ 1. I herd the first shot in this war to day, Santiago de Cuba
and with the flying squadron.

_June_ 2. we had a wild goose chase.

_June_ 3. nothing doing but laying off hear and watching what looks
like to me a big hole in the grond. same thing the 4th and 5th.

_June_ 6. Stand from under, we Bombard the forts and water Baterys to
day for 4 hours but dont know how much damage we don.

_June_ 7. staying out hear and doing nothing.

_June_ 8. same thing.

_June_ 9.   "   "

_June_ 10. we went down to Guantanamo Bay to put some coal on and
landed 40 Marines in the Morning. we wer the first to put foot on Cuban
soil in this war. The 9th the Marblehead and Dolphin Bombarded the
place and made them look like Munkys; they ran away and left every
thing behind them.

_June_ 11. came back to Santiago on the 10th. and laying off hear as
befor.

_June_ 12. Same old thing. Expecting Troops every day.

_June_ 13. Dito.

_June_ 14. the New Orleans was ordered to run in close to the shore and
do som Bombarding By her self Just to break the Monotony and to let us
believe we wer at war. we don a good Job all right, she silenced the
east Battry and the west one too, and made them show up a water Battry
which we did not know any thing about. havent herd how many got kild or
wounded on the other side. But I know they never hert any one on this
side. Got some news from Guantanamo to day. Col. Huntington and his
Marines of 800 Had a Brush with the Spanish, it is reported that 6
marines wer kild and Doctor Gibbs was shot through the head by
accident. there is at Guantanamo Bay the Texas, Marblehead and Porter
and 800 Marines; they expect to have the cable work soon and the Harbor
well under Hand. I forgot to say the Vesuvius landed 3 shots of
dinomite in the Harbor on the night of the 13th at Santiago and did
great damage to the Shore Batterys; the latest report is that the
Cubans are flocking in to Huntingtons camp.

_June_ 15. coaling ship and still retain our posision on the Blockade.

_June_ 16. At 3.30 A.M. this morning all hands was called and the
coffie was passed around with som hardtack and cand Beef at 4 A.M. Turn
to, some 15 or 20 Minutes later Gen Quarters sounded. Then we went at
it to try and see if we could not knock thoes Batterys off the earth.
Bombarded untill 7.15 A.M. Nobody knows how much damage was don, except
we silinced all the Batterys they had and made them show up a nother
one inside of the harbor of which there seems to be lots of them. I
will say right hear that if we take this place its going to be a hot
old Job, and som of us will think we run up against a Hornets nest when
we get in side. they have been talking of forsing the Chanell and Capt
Clark signaled over to the flag ship and asked permishion to take the
leed, and I am sure we will stay with him as long as the ship floats
for we love him. The Vesuvius fired three more shots last night at
about 12. dont know what damage was don But I know we are all tired of
this fooling. if they would only send some soldiers down here from the
regular army, say 6 Regiments of Infantry and 3 of Cavalry, I think,
with what we could put up, that forse would more than be a match for
them and take the place with all ease. The latest Bulitin of the day is
that the Forses at Guantanamo have bin Joined by some Cubans and had a
Brush with the Spanish, and the report is that 40 wer kild on the
Spanish side and 17 taken prisoners of war, one Spanish Lut. 2 Corp and
14 Privates. On our side 3 Cubans Kild and 2 wounded, 3 Marines wounded
and 17 overcome by the heat. But all recovered. Routed the Spanish and
distroyed the water suply and Block House. The Dolphin held there
posision from the water frount and the Texas sunk 2 small Gun boats.

_June_ 17. come down to Guantanamo Bay this morning, put some 300 tons
of coal on and throde some shells over in an old Fort and then puled
out right away for Santiago.

_June_ 20. Bully for the Soldiers, they are hear at last, "I thought
they would com tomorrow," some of the papers say there is 20.000 of
them, that is enough to eat the plase up for lunch. Well I hope we will
soon crack this nut that is so hard to crack. I hear there is 15000
Spanish soldiers over hear.

_June_ 22. the soldiers are landing all O.K. and doing well, and only a
few horses and 2 men lost so far, so the Flag Ship says.

_June_ 26. Started in this morning to see if we coulden knock down that
Spanish old Morro or else knock somthing cruckit around it. Well we
pelted away for an hour or more and the flag ship signaled over to the
Iowa to close in and pump at the Smith Key Battry. The Iowa signaled
Back that her forward Turet was out of order, so it fel to us, we went
in to 700 yards of the shore Battry and did knock down the Spanish flag
with an 8 inch shell and knocked over one of there Big Guns. I belive
if the flag ship had not called us off Capt Clark would have went in
along side of old Morro and give him a tutching up.

_June_ 28. I am geting tired of trying to keep cases on this thing,
there is nothing doing but laying around hear like a lot of sharks
watching for a fish.

_July_ 4. The fish has come out to see us. On the 3rd the Spanish fleet
came out of the Harbor to fight and get a way if posable. (I would have
put this down on the 3rd But I dident have time and was too tired that
night so I put it off for today.) Well the Fleet came out and went to
Davy Joneses locker. it was Just 9.25 A.M., first call had sounded on
our ship for Quarters and we all had our best dudds on; we wer going to
listen to the Articles of War this morning and to have chirch right
affter, But we never did. all of a suden the Ordly on watch made a dive
for the Cabin head first, and told the old man the Fleet was coming out
of the Harbor. the old man jumpt up a standing. as soon as some of the
men seen the ships there, they went to there Quarters with out any
further delay. I was standing on the Quarter Deck waiting for the last
call to go. I heard the news and looking around the affter Terets seen
the first one. I thought she looked Biger than a Mountain. But then I
thought affterwards we could cut her down to her natchral size. of
corse it takes longer to tell about it than it taken us to get ready,
for we wer allways ready, and all we had to do was to sound the Bells
and stand By our Guns, they wer allways loaded so all we had to do was
to turn on the fors draught and pull the triger.

By 9.27 the Oregon fired the first shot of the Battle of July 3rd. 1898
at the first ship that come out of the Harbor. I dont remember the
ships as they come out, But we went in to meet them and passed them som
good shots as they cep coming. about 7 or 9 minuts after they got
started good, one of our 6 inch guns blew up one of the Torpedo Boats,
struck her squar amidships, she sunk like a rock with all on board. and
right hear is where I had to stop for a moment to admire one of there
Guners. I do think he was one of the bravest men I ever had the
pleasure to look upon. That man must have known he was going to a shure
Deth, he stud on Deck and cep firing at us all the time, and the last
time I seen him he was Just going up in the air. As the ships came out
of the harbor they sircled to the right, or Westward, and Capt Clark
knew they were trying to escape. they did not think the old Oregon was
such a runer as she was a fighter, so we Just tailed on with them and
giving them shot for shot. In about 20 minuts the first ship went on
the Beach, plumb knocked out, and 15 minuts later the secon one went on
the Beach, a short ways from the first. Then came the tug of war for we
had to run to catch the Vizcaya and the Colon, but we catched them
both. the Vizcaya was about 4000 yards ahead and the Colon was about 3
miles ahead, and the poor men in the fireroom was working like horses,
and to cheer them up we passed the word down the ventlators how things
was going on, and they passed the word back if we would cut them down
they would get us to where we could do it. So we got in rainge of the
Vizcaya and we sent her ashore with the secondary Battry and 6 inch
guns, and then we settled down for a good chase for the Colon. I
thought she was going to run a way from us. But she had to make a curv
and we headed for a point that she had to come out at. We all think
there is no man in the Navy like Capt Clark, he is a Brave man, he stud
on the Forward 13 inch turet through the thickest of this fight and
directed his ship to the final results.

Coming back to Santiago we waited untill we got to where the first ship
went on the Beach and there fired the national salut. We have 3 Spanish
prisoners on board and they thought we wer at it a gain, and it was all
the sick Bay man could do as to quiet them. I hear there is over 1800
Prisoners and 650 kild and 800 wounded on the third. the three men on
board tells the sickbayman that we run through there fleet coming
around hear, for the next day they found a Pork Barrel ful of holes and
had marked on the head U.S.S. Oregon. We all seem to think we could
take care of our selves Just the same. it is Just 6.50 P.M. now and the
men all say there is no flag flying on the Morro. But I can see Just as
good as any and I can not see any either, But then I think we are out
too far.

_July_ 5. At about 11.45 the danger Signal was flashed by the lookout
from the Massachusetts, she being the one to show her serchlight at the
entrance of the Harbor for the night, the Spanish was trying to sink
one of there old ships in the Chanell so as not to let us in. But Just
3 or 4 shots from the Massachusetts Big 13 inch Guns help them to do
the Job, for she sunk befor they got to the Chanal. there is Spanish
menowar and Torpedo boats strung all along the Beach for 60 miles.

_July_ 10. We are laying off now in Guantanamo Bay filing out to go to
Porto Rico or on the Coast of Spain.

This is all in regards to the trip of the Oregon.

R. CROSS





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Voyage of the Oregon from San
Francisco to Santiago in 1898, by R. Cross

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGE OF THE OREGON IN 1898 ***

***** This file should be named 25723-8.txt or 25723-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/2/25723/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
