The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Good Ship Rover, by Robina F. Hardy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Good Ship Rover


Author: Robina F. Hardy



Release Date: December 10, 2007  [eBook #23811]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD SHIP ROVER***


Transcribed from the [1888] T. Nelson and Sons, Home Sunshine Series, by
David Price, ccx074@pglaf.org

{Cover: cover.jpg}





THE
GOOD SHIP "ROVER."


T. NELSON AND SONS.
London, Edinburgh, and New York.




I.  HIGH AND DRY.


A gallant ship, some three feet in length, with full equipment of white
sails and sturdy masts, rigging, pennon, and figurehead; but it had never
seen the sea--never!  It had "cast anchor" nearly a year before my story
begins in the Leslies' nursery--a very pleasant, airy room, with nice
pictures on the wall and a good many toys scattered about, but certainly
not the very least resembling the sea.  In fact, I don't think Mrs.
Leslie would have liked if it had resembled it; for she was very much
afraid of the children being near a lake or a pond even, on account of
the dangers of damp feet and catching cold--two evils which always
haunted her mind more or less.  She was rather a delicate creature, often
ailing,--which, perhaps, was the reason of these nervous fancies; and
most of the children resembled their mother in this, that there was sure
to be something the matter with one or other of them most days of the
week.  The doctor was seldom long out of the house.  Fortunately, Dr.
Hammond lived just next door, so he was easily sent for; and Walter
Hammond, the doctor's eldest boy, was Harry Leslie's dearest and most
intimate friend.  The two boys were about eight years old, went to the
same school, spent most of their play-hours together, and intended both
to go to the sea together when they were old enough.  For Harry Leslie,
though he had never once seen the sea any more than his ship had done,
had heard and read a great deal about sailor life and adventures, and had
inspired Walter with the same admiration for these as he himself felt.
Besides, his uncle Jack, Mr. Leslie's brother, who had made the ship for
his little nephew, had often told him stories about the sea which he
treasured in his heart all the more, perhaps, because he was so often
mured up by his nursery walls, or even in his little iron bed, on account
of colds, coughs, measles, chicken-pox, etc.

Walter Hammond, unlike his friend, was a strong, bright, merry little
fellow, never a day in the house or away from school; but he was very
fond of Harry all the same.  Walter had only two sisters and then a baby-
brother, all of whom were rather young for him to play with, so he spent
a great deal of his leisure time in the Leslies' nursery.  What scores of
times had Harry and Walter studied and examined the _Rover_!  They had
taken down its sails and its rigging and its masts over and over again.
They knew every inch of its planks, every nail and screw about its
framework.  And how often they had spoken about the delight of launching
it in "real live water," in the wide blue sea perhaps!  That would be
something worth living for.

Harry and Walter were in the same class at Dr. Grierson's Academy in
Rosehampton, and very good scholars both were.  One or other was pretty
sure to be at the top most days, and if Walter was first, Harry would be
not far off, and _vice versa_.

One day, however, the rest of the boys were very much amused at some
strange mistakes made by these duxes.  Harry having been told to mention
some chief towns in Asia Minor, rashly began with "Kingshaven," and then
corrected himself, blushing and looking very much ashamed, while Dr.
Grierson himself had some difficulty in subduing the bursts of laughter
all down the forms.

Then Walter, who had been called upon to stand up and give some account
of the appearance and structure of a steam-engine, astonished everybody
by saying it had "_two masts_!"

That day the inseparable friends were very much lower down in the class
than they were accustomed to be, and it required no little effort on
their part during the succeeding days to prevent their thoughts from
wandering, and to keep them fixed on the more dry and uninteresting
subjects of their lesson.

The younger Leslies were also much excited about going to the sea-side;
but visions of shell-gathering, digging in the sands, and such mild
pursuits, were quite enough for them; and, indeed, they knew so little
about the sea that they had no materials whereof to form any more
brilliant plans.  As to bathing, they were rather frightened about that,
considering that it must be something like going into the green nursery
tub, but with very cold water to wash in!

Walter had been at Margate once with his father, and could describe the
sea to Harry in very lively terms.  The sands, the bathing-coaches, the
rocks, the billows--nothing was forgotten in Walter's narratives.  But,
alas! the little town of Rosehampton, where they lived, was very far away
from any part of this enchanting ocean, and for long there seemed no
chance whatever of Mrs. Leslie consenting to let her children brave the
perils of a month's residence near the sea.

"I like them to go to the country," she would say to her husband or the
doctor, who often recommended sea-air, "and to think of them running
about on the grass when it is dry and sunny; for it is very close and
airless sometimes here in Diamond Terrace in the long summer days.  But
do let me keep to dry land.  It makes me quite nervous to think of Harry
falling over the rocks or getting into boats, and Bobby and Frank getting
their feet wet constantly on the shore when they are _so_ subject to
bronchitis."

"Pooh, pooh, my dear!" her husband would say, "you are far too much
afraid of these children getting into danger.  It makes them little molly-
coddles, indeed it does."  But he was an easy-going man, who let his wife
do pretty much as she liked, and did not interfere with her management of
house or children.

"Mamma," said Harry one day, "how is it that Uncle Jack _never_ catches
cold?--and, besides, he has never been drowned."

"Hush, Harry; don't talk so rashly.  You don't know what may happen to
your uncle yet.  And I do wish he wouldn't tell you all those long
stories about the sea when he comes; they make me quite miserable."

"I like them _awfully_, mamma," cried Harry, "and so does Walter.  And do
you know, mamma, Walter and I are both going to be sailors when we grow
big.  Only I do wish we might sail the _Rover_ first in real sea-water;
it would look so splendid!"

"Well, Harry, be a good boy," said his mother, who did not like to
disappoint her boy more than was for his good, "and don't go on talking
about being a sailor, for that you shall never be.  Your papa and I will
never hear of it.  As to Walter, his father may do what he pleases; but
you are going to help your father in the warehouse when you grow big, so
you don't need to trouble your head about anything else.  But, as I was
saying, if you are a good boy till next holidays, I promise to take you
all to Kingshaven, and you shall sail your ship as much as you like from
the little jetty or the rocks.  It is a nice safe place with lovely
sands--if the sea ever can be said to be _safe_."

Harry listened in silent amazement to these words.  The utter crushing of
his hopes as to sailor-life was for the moment completely forgotten in
the near and enchanting prospect held out to him in its place.  But he
was a kind-hearted, affectionate boy, and even in this hour of excitement
he did not forget his friend.

"But Walter, mamma?" he cried, as his mother was leaving the room,--"how
can I sail it without Walter?"

"Well, you can ask Walter to come with us.  I daresay he will be very
glad," said his mother, calling back from the staircase, for she was in a
hurry about some household affair.

Harry clapped his hands, and ran to tell Walter, who was equally
overjoyed at the idea of going to Kingshaven with Harry.  So they set to
work and counted the weeks and days that must elapse until the holidays
came round, and then they once more thoroughly overhauled the "good ship
_Rover_" to see if it was water-tight and ready for its first voyage.

It would be literally its first voyage.  Harry and Walter had tried the
green tub that belonged to the nursery, but in vain.  It was not nearly
long enough.  Cook would not let them try the fixed tubs in the laundry,
and it was very doubtful if even they would have held the _Rover_.

The bath would have done so easily, and longing eyes had often been fixed
on it with that idea.  But Mrs. Leslie was inexorable--no such dabbling
among water, either hot or cold, was to be permitted; so the _Rover_
still stuck high and dry in the nursery window.




II.  THE SEA!  THE SEA!


The midsummer holidays at last came round, and Mrs. Leslie, who had been
busy packing up and arranging things for some weeks, now resolved to shut
up the house for a whole month and, with the family, set off for
Kingshaven.

It was a long way off--some thirty or forty miles--so it was quite like
an adventure to Harry Leslie and his little brothers and sisters, and
scarcely less so to Walter Hammond, who was to accompany them.  Dr.
Hammond could not leave home on account of his numerous patients; and had
it not been for this fine chance, Walter would have had only a few days
in the country now and then.  He was a good-tempered, sensible boy, and a
pleasant guest in any household.  Mr. Leslie would be able to go down
with his family to Kingshaven; but was to leave them there and return to
business, making his home for the time at a married sister's house in
Rosehampton.  So everything seemed promising; and even Mrs. Leslie,
naturally of a most anxious and troubled disposition, set off with hardly
a cloud on her horizon.

Harry had been very active in helping his mother all the day before the
departure, and once when carrying a heavy box down from the attics he had
felt it bump heavily against his knee; but being a brave little boy, he
said and thought nothing about it at the time.  All through the afternoon
and night, however, a strange, dull pain in the knee haunted him.  He did
not tell anybody, but he wished frequently it would go away before he got
to Kingshaven.  There stood the _Rover_, all nicely packed and ready for
the railway journey, and Harry's heart beat high when he thought how soon
he should see it riding proudly on the waves--the admired of all
beholders.

Harry wakened early on the Saturday morning that had been fixed for their
journey with this bright vision before his eyes; but a sudden shoot of
pain, as he moved his knee, made him fall back on his pillow and almost
scream for help.  He controlled himself, however, and began to examine
again the wounded spot.  There was a swelling; but the blue and black
marks he had seen last night were nearly gone.  The thing had rather too
white a look; but Harry took this for a good sign, and hoped it would be
all right before long.  He got up and dressed, slowly and with
difficulty, and still concealed even from his mother's sharp eyes that
anything was wrong.  Walter came round early, and in time the whole party
were off.

After a long but pleasant journey they reached the busy little sea-side
resort of Kingshaven--a brisk, rising town, greatly patronized by
families in search of bathing and safe boating and other marine
enjoyments.  Briery Cottage, which Mrs. Leslie had hired for the month,
was very satisfactory in every way but one.  It stood so far up in the
town and in such a position that no view of the sea whatever, not even
the tiniest bit, was to be obtained from its windows.  That was a
drawback certainly; and as they had only chosen it from an advertisement,
they had not taken this point into consideration.  It could not be helped
now.

"Well, it does not much matter, after all," said Mrs. Leslie.  "You
children will be all day long on the beach; and as for me, if I take my
knitting down to the rocks all the afternoons, I shall see as much of the
sea as I want to.  You know I am not so much in love with it as you all
are."

Briery Cottage, though it did not command a sea-view, was a very nice,
comfortable little cottage, with a pleasant garden in front and a long
strip of bowling-green behind.  In front passed the wide public road,
with many carriages and other vehicles constantly coming and going; so it
could not be called a dull place at all events.

"O mamma, what a nice place Kingshaven is!" said Harry, quite
enthusiastically.  "I'm sure I should never weary here even if we were to
stay for a whole year!"

"Not even if you didn't see the sea, Harry?" asked his father, laughing.

"Oh, but that would be impossible, you know, papa!" answered Harry.

Harry was to have a longer time at Kingshaven than he imagined, and
perhaps if he could have foreseen everything he would not have talked so
very confidently of "_never_ wearying."  But it is very good for all of
us that just one step of our way is open before us.  It helps to make us
humble and trustful, looking for guidance better and higher than our own,
and may often preserve us from being needlessly downcast and depressed.

Mr. and Mrs. Leslie were very glad to see all their children so well and
bright and so pleased with the holiday treat they had provided for them.

"I must come down on Monday morning to the shore before going home," Mr.
Leslie said to the boys as he saw them carrying their boat, "and see the
good ship _Rover's_ first voyage.  It will be quite a sight!"

"Oh, we are all coming!" added his wife.  "I assure you none of us would
like to miss the spectacle; and if none of the little ones fall over the
rocks, I'm sure everything will go well!"

By the time they got thoroughly settled in their new home it was getting
quite late in the day, so there was only time for a saunter all along the
beach and the parade and the principal streets of Kingshaven.  It was
with some difficulty that Harry managed to walk now; but so anxious was
he to secure his grand treat on Monday that he still kept his pain to
himself.  Walter and he had selected one delightful rock, stretching far
out into the sea, from which to make the first launch and trial trip of
the _Rover_.  There were lots of little boys already there, and on
similar rocks, sailing their tiny boats, but none of them had anything
the least like the _Rover_.

"We'll call it a pirate ship, Wat," cried Harry excitedly, "and it will
be grand to see it chasing the little boats all about.  What a splendid
thing the sea is!  I wish we could stay always beside it."

Walter agreed to all Harry said.

"Yes," he said, "that will be the very thing.  The _Rover_ is the very
name for a pirate ship, you know.  Let's be up in good time on Monday
morning, Harry, and be down here for a first venture by ourselves, in
case it doesn't work right just at the very first, you know, and people
might laugh."

So the two boys chatted and planned while Mr. and Mrs. Leslie and the
rest sallied on in front.  But Harry was not sorry when his mother gave
the order for everybody to go home and get to bed, so as to have a good
wash--it being Saturday night--and a good sound sleep before Sunday; for
Mrs. Leslie was a good mother, and loved to teach her children to observe
the Lord's day rightly, and to enjoy it in a way worthy of its sacred
rest.  The Leslies all liked going with their parents to church.  It was
never thought a weariness or a punishment even by the youngest.  They
could not, of course, understand all that was said and done there, but
they learned to sit quietly and reverently while their elders listened,
which was in itself a valuable training for after life; and there were
many portions of the service which they could appreciate for themselves.
Mr. Leslie always liked them to say over the text and the psalms and
hymns they had heard, and this was looked forward to by the youngsters as
quite a pleasant exercise.

But we must go on with the story.

"What are you thinking about, Harry?" said his mother as she bustled
about, getting Bobby and Frank, Lucy and Janey, washed and dried and put
to bed in the tiny nursery at Briery Cottage, which indeed was very
different from the one they had left at Rosehampton, though, with the
usual happy taste of children, Lucy and Janey thought their narrow cribs
ever so much nicer than the home ones; while Bobby and Frank considered
the two skylights here infinitely preferable to the large bow-window they
were accustomed to.

Harry was sitting in a contemplative manner upon a trunk on the landing
below, Walter having preceded him upstairs.

"Run after Walter and see that you two boys have a good scrub.  The bath
is ready for you; and see you don't hang about after it to catch cold,
but get into Blanket Bay as fast as you can.  I'm sure I feel quite ready
for it myself after all that trudging about over sands and rocks."

Thus admonished, Harry made his way upstairs to the back attic, where
Walter and he and the _Rover_ were moored.




III.  "BLANKET BAY."


Early next morning Walter Hammond knocked at Mrs. Leslie's door.

"Could you come and look at Harry's knee?" he asked in rather a
frightened voice.  "We think there is something wrong with it."

Mrs. Leslie lost no time, you may be sure.  And here, sure enough, she
found poor Harry lying in excruciating pain, and with a great white
swelling on his knee, which her experienced eyes saw at once was no
ordinary bruise or sprain.

"My boy!" she cried, "why didn't you tell me sooner?  If I had only
known!"

Harry could not help his tears flowing fast now.  It had been such a long
strain upon him to keep up hour after hour, that it was quite a relief at
last to have the very worst fully confessed.

"I thought it would go off, mamma," he said, "or I would have told.  And
I was so anxious to be well just now, for the sea; and oh, I can't move
one single step!"

"Don't cry, dear.  We'll send for the doctor and see what he says.  I
daresay he will make it better before long.  And you mustn't fret, you
know, or you'll make yourself worse."  So saying, Mrs. Leslie had the
nearest medical man sent for, and the little patient laid neatly and
comfortably in bed--as her skilful hands could well do.

Dr. Bell came, and pronounced poor Harry's a very grave case of what is
popularly known as "white swelling," brought on by the hurt he had
received, but chiefly owing to the little boy's very delicate system.  "He
must lie quite still for some weeks at least," said the doctor.  "There
must be no trying to get up or move about until I give permission."

Poor Harry! it was indeed a hard and bitter trial, and he did not then
know that he would yet be thankful one day for a lesson taught him by
this very trouble.  But, indeed, we very seldom know such things till the
time of trial is long past.

Walter was removed to a sofa-bed in the parlour, so as to give Harry more
room and air, since the little attic must be his sole abode for long
weeks in all probability.

And so it proved.  Harry lay there day after day, hardly daring even to
sit half up in bed for meals, and compelled to lie mostly on his back.
There stood the unfortunate ship _Rover_, whose piratical wanderings had
also been cruelly frustrated.  It stood on a table just below the
skylight, so that Harry could see it easily where he lay; but now the
sight rather added to his vexation than otherwise.  Would he ever be able
to sail it before they left Kingshaven and returned to Rosehampton?  It
seemed very unlikely.

Their kind friend Dr. Hammond came down at once on hearing of Harry's
illness--which was of course a great comfort, as he knew so well about
his little patient; but he only confirmed Dr. Bell's verdict, and
declared Harry must continue in the quiet quarters of "Blanket Bay," as
his mother called it.  The unfortunate thing of _this_ Blanket Bay was
that it did not look to the sea, nor indeed to anything but the sky.

The days passed wonderfully, however.  Harry was fond of reading, and
plenty of nice books were got for him; the younger children were, of
course, perfectly happy digging houses and castles in the sand; and
Walter did the best he could to amuse himself companionless, or with any
boys who seemed friendly and ready to play with him.  He did all he could
to amuse Harry, too, by coming home with stories of all he had seen, and
would sit for hours on the bedside chatting to him, if allowed; but Mrs.
Leslie said it was very wrong to waste his holidays that way, and
generally packed him off to the shore again.

Harry Leslie knew that to Walter as well as to himself it was a great
disappointment not to see the _Rover_ floated.  He thought over it many a
time, and being a kind-hearted boy in general, it did vex him not a
little that Walter also should be disappointed.  But the idea of his
telling Walter to take the _Rover_ down himself to the rocks, and have
the delight of seeing it ride proudly on the waves--oh, that was too much
for Harry!  If the idea ever did really present itself plainly to his
mind as a thing that might be done--and I am not at all sure that it
did--then it was put aside at once as a plan quite ridiculous and not to
be encouraged.  Harry had read of Sir Philip Sidney passing the cup of
water from his own parched lips to the dying-soldier who had still
greater need of it than himself, and he had thought it a grand and
beautiful action; but then it had never occurred to him that in his own
little common life--the every-day life of home and school, or it might be
sick-room--deeds of the _same kind of heroism_, though not by any means
so likely to be spoken of, were possible to and even required of him and
every one who wished to lead a brave and noble life.

It was not till nearly a fortnight had come and gone--half the time they
were to spend at Kingshaven--that some words of his father's set Harry
thinking of this very subject, and the thing struck him as it had never
done before.

Mr. Leslie had come down at the end of the week, as he always did, to
spend Sunday with his family, and to see how his little sick boy was
getting on.  He stood looking at the _Rover_ for a little that Saturday
night, and then said before leaving the room,--

"By-the-by, you've never got your grand ship sailed yet.  What will Uncle
Jack say when he hears of it?  But let me see.  Couldn't Watty there sail
it?  It's a sort of pity he shouldn't have some pleasure out of it, isn't
it?"

"O papa!" cried Harry as if in pain.

"Why, what is it?" said his father, alarmed at the crimson colour rising
in his son's face.  "Is the knee so painful, my man?"

"No, no, papa," said Harry, rather abashed; "I was thinking of what you
said.  You know it is _my_ ship--my very own.  How _could_ I let Walter
or any one else sail it, when I can't even look out and see it, you
know?"

Mr. Leslie was greatly surprised by this speech, but he was a
good-natured, easy-going man, as has been said, never liking to cross or
disappoint anybody if he could help it, and the sight of his poor little
Harry lying there perhaps weighed against his own better judgment.

"Ah!  I see," he said.  "You don't like it to go out of your own hands.
Well, you must just act 'dog in the manger' if you will, my boy.  It is
for yourself to judge.  I never meddle with other people's affairs,
whether about toys or big things!  You shall do exactly as you like with
your boat, my boy; and I daresay it won't be so very long before you and
Walter will be able to go down to the beach together.  By-the-by, did I
tell you I met Dr. Grierson, and he was asking most kindly for his little
scholar--quite sorry to hear of your being laid up, Harry?  And the young
Melvilles are perhaps coming down to Kingshaven before long.  You'll like
to see them again.  Jack Lowford had a nasty fall off that bicycle of
his.  He was coming down Grove Lane, where it is rather steep, you know,
and the thing went right over.  Jack cut his head badly against the big
gray stone at Mr. Sheffard's gate, and had to be taken into the house and
doctored up a bit before he could go home.  Very kind people these
Sheffards are, I must say.--But here comes Wat, who will give you news of
the beach more interesting than mine.  So good-night, my boy, and see
that you sleep sound."

So saying Mr. Leslie left him to repose




IV.  FAIRLY AFLOAT.


Harry Leslie lay long awake that night, thinking over the words his
father had carelessly enough dropped.  "Dog in the manger"--what did that
mean exactly?  He had heard the phrase more than once, but had never
stopped to consider it in any way.  Yet it was a plain sort of
illustration, carrying its own meaning along with it.  Harry had once
been staying in the country with some cousins at a farm-house called
Clover Hollow, and he remembered them all laughing one day at "Grip," a
little Skye terrier, that had got into one of the mangers in the stable,
and kept at a respectable distance the good old pony to which it
belonged, barking at him and refusing to allow him the enjoyment of his
own breakfast.  And Grip could not, of course, enjoy it himself--chopped
hay and oats not being at all in _his_ line.  Seemingly, the only
pleasure Grip derived from this performance lay in keeping "Donald," the
old pony, from having any breakfast!  And it was very laughable at the
time.  Yes; Harry understood the words perfectly.  And though it had been
laughable enough in the case of Grip, which was only a terrier, still,
however clever he might have been thought, Harry felt that it was not
quite the same when practised by rational beings.  True, he was only
keeping that which most clearly belonged only to himself, whereas Master
Grip had feloniously seized on the possession of another.  There was that
difference, certainly.  Still, there was something in the thing Harry did
not quite like.  He was usually a kind, unselfish sort of boy, and he did
not enjoy feeling that he was doing something rather miserly now.  And
then, just that evening, his mother had been reading some verses from the
Bible to him, as she usually did, and one of them had been: "Whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them."  He had not
thought much about the words at the time, but they came back to his
memory now.

Early next morning Harry sent for Walter to come and speak to him.

"Wat," he said very cheerily, "the _Rover_ is going to make its first
voyage to-day.  Hurrah!  Aren't you glad?"

Walter stared at his friend and wondered if he had grown suddenly worse,
and was talking nonsense through feverishness.

"I doubt they won't let you out to the beach just yet, Hal!" he said
soothingly.

"No, indeed!" said Harry, smiling brightly.  "But _you_ are going to take
the ship down for me, and launch her, and all that.  Bobby and Frank will
go too, of course, and the girls, if nurse can take them; and then you'll
come back and tell me all about it--won't you, Wat?"

{Harry's proposal: p39.jpg}

"Nonsense, Harry, nonsense!" cried his friend.  "Why, we _couldn't_ do it
without you; it would be no fun at all.  Your own ship too.  No, you
needn't say another word about it."

But Harry kept to his purpose; and in time Walter felt that he was really
quite in earnest, and that to refuse would only vex him.

"Well, if you really want me to, Harry," he said reluctantly.  "But won't
you be awfully dull when I take the good ship away from your room?  You've
often said it was quite a companion to you when we're all out."

"Not a bit!" cried Harry bravely.  "I'm quite tired of seeing the old
thing on dry land.  I'm wearying awfully to know how it floats, and
you'll come home and tell me all about it.  Tell me if there were people
looking on, and if the pennons looked well when they were waving out at
sea, and all that.  I want to hear what everybody says about it, and if
they think the _Rover_ as fine a boat as they have ever seen at the Shelf
Rock before.  So you see, Wat, you must make haste and be off with it, or
I'll be quite put out, and that will be sure to make me worse again.  Ask
mamma if that isn't true!  I wonder I never thought of this before.  It
was awfully stupid of me, to be sure!"

His eyes sparkled brightly now, all the brighter, perhaps, because he had
just dashed away some childish tears; for he was very young, you must
remember, and also weak from illness.  He wanted to make his tiny bit of
self-sacrifice right bravely and cheerfully, feeling that a grudging
manner of giving sadly mars a gift.

Mr. and Mrs. Leslie were greatly pleased at hearing what Harry had
planned for the others, especially as it had come entirely from himself.
He had certainly not been urged to do it in any way; it had not even been
suggested to him.

{The "Rover" on a trial trip: p41.jpg}

Well, a large and enthusiastic crowd of juveniles gathered round the
Shelf Rock that afternoon to watch the good ship _Rover_ make her first
voyage on the deep.  And beautifully indeed did she spread her white
sails to the breeze, while, guided by a string secured in Walter's hand,
her graceful form cut the waves or danced lightly over them, her bright
red pennons floating gracefully from stern and mast.  It was quite a long
time before the excitement of this first voyage wore away.  Each of the
children had in turn to get a "hold" of the guiding-string; and great
amusement was caused by one of the wooden-doll sailors which Mrs. Leslie
had dressed for Harry's ship tumbling overboard and bobbing about for a
long time among the creeks and crannies of Shelf Rock.

At last "Jack-a-tar" was rescued by means of a hand-net which Walter had
for his natural history researches; and the little man was found to be
not a whit the worse, except for a drenching of his blue serge suit--for
even his well-glued-on hat had survived the fury of the waves.

You can imagine what a grand story all this made to tell poor Harry,
lying in his little bed under the skylight, with his back to the sea and
all the wonders thereof.  And no one was more delighted with the whole
affair than Harry himself, feeling quite a weight off his mind, now that
he had got quit for ever of that nasty "dog-in-the-manger" sort of
feeling.  How he laughed about poor Jack-a-tar, and took him into his own
hands to be thoroughly restored, while his mother took off the blue suit
to dry at the kitchen fire!

Altogether this was one of the happiest days Harry had spent at
Kingshaven.  Every day now the children took out the _Rover_, and many
happy hours they all spent with it.

Next week a visitor was announced.  It was Uncle Jack himself!  And along
with him came the biggest, bulkiest parcel you could imagine.  When it
was opened it proved to be a first-rate sort of invalid carriage, capable
of being folded up or out in any and every direction--quite an invention
of Uncle Jack's own brilliant genius.  Dr. Bell said it was the very
thing for his little patient, who would be able for it in a very few days
now.  Dr. Hammond also was greatly pleased with this new conveyance when
he came down.

Various little trial trips were made in this couch, at first only into
the front garden, and then into the long strip of bowling-green at the
back.  And how the little invalid _did_ enjoy the fresh, sweet summer
air, fragrant with honeysuckle and sweet-brier, and all the more
delightful to him from the whiff of strong salt and even _tar_ corning up
from the shore.  Harry felt as if he should soon be well and strong again
if he were only to have such nice rides as this every day.

At first his knee did pain him considerably even at the least motion; but
gradually, as he gained in health and strength, this wore away, and he
could be drawn quite a long distance and then left out in some nice
sheltered spot, with his book beside him, just to drink in the health-
giving breezes.

Uncle Jack's own strong steady hand was usually the one which drew him
about for many days.  It seemed to please the kindly sailor to do as much
for his little nephew.  And no one could pull the chair so well, Harry
thought, for he never felt much pain when Uncle Jack was in charge.  But
by-and-by Walter was allowed to try his skill at it, and very proud and
happy he was to try.  The best days were those when Harry could be taken
right down to the shore and set upon one of the more sheltered rocks; but
that was only when the weather was very dry and sunny and there was not
too much wind for the patient.

One very fine afternoon, however, quite a large party assembled at the
Shelf Rock.  There was Harry in his couch, laid snugly in the centre of
the group, Bobby and Freddy, Janey and Lucy dancing round him, mamma with
a large basket of good things encamped close by, and papa, Uncle Jack,
Walter, and good Dr. Hammond, all there to enjoy the family "_picnic_!"
But before the feast was spread the good ship _Rover_ was to be launched
once more, and that was done by Uncle Jack's well-skilled hands, after
which he put the guiding-string in Harry's white little hand and bade him
hold it firm.  Harry's eyes sparkled and his colour mounted; for he felt
the full pleasure of this moment, free from any mean or selfish thought.

After all this Mr. Leslie began to think it would be best just to let
Harry remain all the summer at Kingshaven, so he secured another cottage
nearer the sea than their present quarters; and here Harry remained, and
the children by turns, with nurse to keep order, and the parents looking
down now and again to see that all was right.  Walter had, of course, to
go back to school, and he was dux every day now since Harry was off the
field.  However, next year Harry managed quite to make up to him again,
being ever so much stronger then; and in due time the two boys went to
Rugby together, remaining fast friends as before.

But we are going on too fast.

Let us look back first to the little seaside cottage where Harry is so
happy--never wearying of Kingshaven, as indeed he had declared he never
would, even when he knew not how long his stay was to be.  He is taken
out to the beach every day by careful hands, and is gathering strength
bit by bit.  Often he is carried over to the Shelf Rock, from there to
guide with his own hand the beautiful gliding movements of his pretty
ship.  Harry feels that this past time of trial has been a blessing to
him, since it has saved him from growing into a grasping or selfish boy;
and he looks back with pleasure on a sight he did not see--the first
voyage of

THE GOOD SHIP "ROVER."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD SHIP ROVER***


******* This file should be named 23811.txt or 23811.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/8/1/23811



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

