The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zion National Park, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Zion National Park
       Bryce Canyon, Cedar Breaks, Kaibab Forest, North Rim of Grand Canyon

Author: Various

Release Date: November 19, 2014 [EBook #47397]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZION NATIONAL PARK ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                           Copyright 1925 by
                              W. H. Murray
                        GENERAL PASSENGER AGENT
                          Union Pacific System
                              OMAHA, NEB.

             [Illustration: Union Pacific System Overland]




                           ZION NATIONAL PARK
                              BRYCE CANYON
                              CEDAR BREAKS
                             KAIBAB FOREST
                       NORTH RIM OF GRAND CANYON


                     [Illustration: Saddled horse]

                             ISSUED BY THE
                          Union Pacific System

    [Illustration: _The Great White Throne from West Rim Trail, Zion
                            National Park_]

               [Illustration: _Panorama of Zion Canyon_]




         The Land of Flaming Canyons and Jeweled Amphitheatres


  _Touched by a light that hath no name,_
  _A glory never sung,_
  _Aloft on sky and mountain wall,_
  _Are God’s great pictures hung._
                                                            --_Whittier_

Southward from the thirty-eighth parallel of latitude the surface of
Western Utah descends in magnificent “Cyclopean steps” from the
flattened summits of the Wasatch Mountains, 11,000 feet high, to 3,000
feet at the _Rio Virgen_, then ascends gently in Arizona to the colossal
arch of the Kaibab Plateau, 9,000 feet in elevation and overlooking the
Grand Canyon. These Titanic terraces and palisaded plateaus, more
particularly the flaming canyons and jeweled amphitheatres cut from
their color-saturated rock layers, form scenic spectacles without peer
or rival on the globe. Nothing else is comparable to these wonderlands.
To see them is both a thrilling adventure and an artistic delight.

Measured by civilization’s yardstick, the unknown land in which they lie
is a frontier, still in the pioneer stage of existence. It is not so
long since the forts along the way actually repelled Indian attacks; it
is not so far to fastnesses where cougars come forth to prey on deer, or
to desert valleys where wild mustangs range. On the edge of the plains
are ruins of primitive dwellings of which the modern Indian knows
nothing; in many a secluded canyon are the more inscrutable habitations
of the cliff dwellers. The indomitable ranchers have built quaint,
poplar-shaded villages with homes of adobe, and their farms are often
fenced with stone.

           [Illustration: _The Watchman, Zion National Park_]

It is a mysterious land of purple sage and empurpled distances, of
incredible color, of sun-magic and the wizardry of wind and water. It is
a place to drink in beauty, to form new conceptions of the divine.

Geologists recognize three subdivisions of the region from north to
south: the High Plateaus; the Terraced Plateaus; the Grand Canyon
Platform. From Cedar Breaks on the High Plateau it is more than 100
miles to Bright Angel Point on Grand Canyon’s rim; from Hurricane Ledge
on the west, eastward to the Colorado River is more than 100 miles.

The country reveals fascinating chapters of geologic history. It is a
region that has undergone great transitions, alternately sea bottom and
mountain top; a region broken and tilted by tremendous displacements; a
region scorched and branded by intense volcanic action; but more than
all else, from the viewpoint of human interest, a region profoundly
sculptured and given its most distinctive character by the
beauty-creating genius of erosion.

From Cedar Breaks, cut into mountains 11,000 feet high, the vision has a
sweep of 100 miles, and the vast terraces may be seen thrust out to the
south like promontories into the sea. Where one succeeds another, the
uppermost presents sinuous cliff walls, hundreds of miles in length and
superbly distinctive in color and carving. More than 10,000 feet of
strata are exposed, “a library of the ages in vivid bindings” that
contains the fossil remains of creatures since the morning of life on
earth. Each step down indicates the removal, by streams, rain, frost and
wind, of all the rock-layers above it. From the Grand Canyon Platform,
these 10,000 feet of strata have been completely swept away.[1]

The highest of the Terraced Plateaus, the Markagunt and Paunsaugunt, in
which Cedar Breaks and Bryce Canyon lie, break down in spired palisades
of the Pink Cliffs, endless in sculptured variety. Beneath the Markagunt
the southern scarps of the Kolob Plateau, into which flaming Zion Canyon
is sunk, form noble cliffs of pure, reposeful white. The next step
downward displays the glowing Vermilion Cliffs, castellated with ornate
prodigality and perhaps the grandest of all. Lower still are the
Shinarump Cliffs, banded with reds, browns, yellows, greens and purples.
Between them and the Kaibab lies a stretch of desert like a flattened
rainbow. Such is the strange, magnificent and colorful structure of the
land.

          [Illustration: _Angels Landing, Zion National Park_]

Zion Canyon is a profound gorge with the colors of blood, fire and snow,
a matchless carving by the greatest of all sculptors, erosion. Several
of its mighty rock temples rank with the most majestic masses in the
land. The variety of its endless etchings, the exquisite harmonies of
its painted precipices, the sustained grandeur of its stupendous buttes
and walls, its glorious cycle of color from dawn to sunset are sources
of undimmed delight to the artistic instinct within everyone. It has one
aspect of beauty from its green-garbed floor, another from its dizzy rim
of white; from the dusky depths of the Narrows the dominant sensation is
soul-gripping awe.

Zion National Park includes other canyons of extraordinary interest, and
the entire terrace-top of the broad Kolob Plateau is a domain of
incredibly fantastic formations.

Cedar Breaks, the highest of Utah’s jeweled amphitheatres, is a place of
wild and lofty beauty, a series of vast sculptured basins sunk into the
summits of the mountains. Endless outflung bastions and buttresses,
supporting towers, parapets and craggy spires, parade from the rim down
into the painted abyss where, dotted by the green of pines, red, orange,
yellow, purple and white are banded and splashed in a symphony of color
literally unbelievable till the eyes confirm.

Bryce Canyon also is an amphitheatre, a richer, more compacted bit of
resplendence. You hardly believe that Bryce Canyon exists until you have
gazed many times; so amazing is its beauty that it seems like the
flashing vision of a dream. It is something heretofore unknown and
unsuspected in scenery--a miracle of erosion, a peerless fantasy of
color. From its depths, in pairs, in groups, in clusters, in hosts and
in myriads, leap to the eyes the most amazingly bizarre forms, slender,
dainty, bulky, grotesque--a bewildering combination of heaven and hell
in which the angelic easily predominates. These myriad forms, human,
animal and geometrical, lighted with unearthly radiance, seem to dance
from their celestial castles and gorgeous grottoes to meet the beholder.
Bryce contains all that architecture, all that sculpture knows, in one
great glory hole painted pink, red, white, orange and purple.

[Illustration: _East Temple and the Twin Brothers, Zion National Park_]

What magic the morning and the evening sun performs on the pigmented
palisades of this unique land! A dull rust red a moment ago, that
distant peristyle now glows like fiery embers; the whites are more
dazzlingly white and caressingly soft; the orange tones are enriched;
the purple shadows swarm like birds. Colors flit mysteriously from
salient to salient as if some one back stage were focusing spotlights.
Dormant, crouching bulks rise, stretch and add to their girths, decking
themselves in their most splendid raiment to bid farewell to the master
of ceremonies, the vivifying sun.

Farther to the south is the Kaibab Forest and the North Rim of Grand
Canyon, remote from traveled ways. Kaibab National Forest is the largest
and most beautiful virgin forest in the United States. Beneath the
stately pines, spruces and firs, the grassy forest floor is as clean as
a carefully groomed lawn, and there are many open parks, aspen
encircled, of bewitching charm. Numberless deer roam unmolested through
this fairy forest and the rare white-tailed squirrel flits ghostlike
through its aisles. There Roosevelt hunted and discriminating
beauty-lovers have sought the region for years.

Words are of little avail to describe the Grand Canyon. Across the great
plateau the Colorado River has cut a series of canyons about 220 miles
long, a mile in depth and twelve miles in width. The Kaibab division is
the deepest and wildest part of the Grand Canyon and presents its
sublimest scenes. On the North Rim are some of the most celebrated of
all the viewpoints, though known only to a few hundred adventurous
travelers--Bright Angel Point, Point Sublime, Point Imperial, Cape Final
and Cape Royal.

The way is now prepared for you to see these miracle places of America
in comfort.

      [Illustration: _The Temple of Sinawava, Zion National Park_]


                    Cedar City to Zion National Park

The highway southward from Cedar City (the Zion Park Highway) is on the
floor of an arm of prehistoric Lake Bonneville. This is the Great Basin
region, a sort of prison for running water because none of its streams
ever reach the sea. In the east are the steep scarps of the Markagunt
and Kolob Plateaus limited by a tremendous fault plane, the Hurricane
Ledge; in the west are the Iron Mountains, veritable masses of iron ore;
in the south are the lofty, majestic Pine Valley Mountains, extinct
volcanoes whose dark, wrinkled summits exceed 10,000 feet in elevation.

Hamilton’s Fort, a few miles from Cedar City, was once a frontier
outpost, the scene of several battles with Indians. Near the village of
Kanarra the route passes over the rim of the Great Basin and enters the
Colorado River watershed. Here Hurricane Ledge lifts more sharply into
prominence, a precipitous rampart of gray and red rock mottled by piñons
and junipers. The surface on which the road lies is the same as that on
top of the ledge; the land in the valley either dropped hundreds of feet
or the plateau was upthrust an equal distance. Hurricane Fault, as
geologists call it, is the most striking displacement in the West. It
extends from the volcanic Tushar Mountains, north of Cedar City, along
the base of the Markagunt Plateau and southward across the Grand Canyon,
a total distance of more than 200 miles.

    [Illustration: _Looking Toward the Narrows, Zion National Park_]

The road now follows Ash Creek, a tributary of the Virgin, over lava
flows where prickly pears, pin-cushion cacti, yucca, torchweed and
miner’s candlesticks grow among the sage brush. Thereabouts the first
view is had of the Valley of the Virgin, Utah’s “Dixie,” a tumbled
region of low mesas, black volcanic cones, lava fields and dunes of
cherry-red sand, settled by Mormon colonists in 1858. This “Dixie”
section of Utah, about 3,000 feet in elevation, is sub-tropical in
climate, grows a large variety of agricultural products including cotton
and tobacco, and its poplar-shaded villages have a quaintness suggestive
of foreign lands. One of the most picturesque communities is
Toquerville, named after an Indian chief, and where the automobiles stop
so that the traveler may purchase for small sums an amazing variety of
delicious fruit: figs, pomegranates, grapes, melons, almonds, peaches,
pears, plums and apricots. Along the village street, with its double row
of poplars planted as windbreaks, are odd houses of adobe fenced with
stone, seemingly asleep beneath their luxuriant fig trees; irrigation
streams gurgle and sing with the cool seduction of flowing water in an
arid land. The scene has a pastoral air of Biblical peace and plenty.
Three miles south, the Harding Highway crosses La Verkin Creek, turns
eastward, and begins to climb.

       [Illustration: _The Three Patriarchs, Zion National Park_]

In an instant the scene changes completely. Long, buttressed and fretted
mesa promontories parade solemnly into view, an endless array of
marching mountains banded with buff, red, pink and gray, mountains that
seem to have come from nowhere. Soon arises across the gray-green sage
the huge rock cathedral called Smithsonian Butte, spired with silver and
gray; and then, instantaneously dominating the entire landscape, there
appears, at the gates of Zion, the West Temple of the Virgin. The
transcendent beauty of this tremendous tinted temple of stone is best
realized when irradiated by the morning or afternoon sun. The southern
facade of the structure forms a sundial for the villages near by. The
finest description is that of Captain C. E. Dutton, a celebrated
geologist who, while in the service of the government, wrote in 1880:


 Captain Dutton’s Description of the West Temple and the Gates of Zion

                         (_Somewhat Abridged_)

“In an hour’s time, we reached the crest of the isthmus, and in an
instant there flashed before us a scene never to be forgotten. In coming
time it will, I believe, take rank with a very small number of
spectacles each of which will, in its own way, be regarded as the most
exquisite of its kind which the world discloses.

      [Illustration: _The Great White Throne, Zion National Park_]

“Across the canyon stands the central and commanding object of the
picture, the Western Temple, rising 4,000 feet above the river. Its
glorious summit was the object we had seen an hour before, and now the
matchless beauty and majesty of its vast mass is all before us. Yet it
is only the central object of a mighty throng of structures wrought up
to the same exalted style and filling up the entire panorama. Right
opposite us are the two principal forks of the Virgin, the Parunuweap
coming from the east, and the Mukuntuweap, or Little Zion Valley,
descending from the north. The Parunuweap is seen emerging through a
stupendous gateway and chasm nearly 3,000 feet in depth. The further
wall of this canyon swings northward and becomes the eastern wall of
Little Zion Valley. As it sweeps down the Parunuweap, it breaks into
great pediments covered all over with the richest carving. The effect is
much like that which the architect of the Milan Cathedral appears to
have designed, though here it is vividly suggested rather than fully
realized. The sumptuous, bewildering, mazy effect is all there, but when
we attempt to analyze it in detail it eludes us.

  [Illustration: _Distant View of the West Temple of the Virgin, Zion
                            National Park_]

“The flank of the wall receding up the Mukuntuweap is for a mile or two
similarly decorated, but soon breaks into new forms much more impressive
and wonderful. A row of towers half a mile high is quarried out of the
palisade and stands well advanced from its face. There is an eloquence
to their forms which stirs the imagination with singular power and
kindles in the mind of the dullest observer a glowing response.

“Directly in front of us a complex group of white towers, springing from
a central pile, mounts upward to the clouds. Out of their midst, and
high over all, rises a dome-like mass which dominates the entire
landscape. It is almost pure white, with brilliant streaks of carmine
descending its vertical walls. At the summit it is truncated and a flat
tablet is laid upon the top, showing its edge of deep red. It is
impossible to liken this object to any familiar shape, for it resembles
none. Yet its shape is far from being indefinite; on the contrary it has
definiteness and individuality which extort an exclamation of surprise
when first beheld. Call it a dome; not because it has the ordinary shape
of such a structure but because it performs the functions of a dome.

“The towers which surround it are of inferior mass and altitude, but
each is a study of fine form and architectural effect. They are white
above and change to rich red below. Dome and towers are planted upon a
substructure no less admirable. A curtain wall 1,400 feet high descends
vertically from the eaves of the temples and is succeeded by a steep
slope of ever-widening base-courses leading down to the esplanade below.
The curtain wall is decorated with a lavish display of vertical
mouldings, and the ridges, eaves and mitred angles are fretted with
serrated cusps. This ornamentation is repetitive, not symmetrical. But
though exact symmetry is wanting, Nature has here brought home to us the
truth that symmetry is only one of an infinite range of devices by which
beauty can be realized.

  _And finer forms are in the quarry_
  _Than ever Angelo evoked!_

“Nothing can exceed the wondrous beauty of Little Zion Valley, which
separates the two temples and their respective groups of towers.”

          [Illustration: _West Rim Trail, Zion National Park_]

But the traveler has not yet reached the gates of Zion, although distant
views continue to appear and disappear. The Virgin River is now near at
hand on the right, a swift, moody, meandering stream whose red waters
are the creators of the fertile farms along its banks and sometimes
their destroyers. The foreground landscape is red, although the broad,
sloping buttresses of the mesas, folded, fluted and flounced _ad
infinitum_, display buffs, yellows, grays, browns and purples.

          [Illustration: _Sentinel Peak, Zion National Park_]

Near Virgin City there is a view northeastward of sensational Guardian
Angel Pass. Across Great West Canyon, apparently, stands an immense dam
of rock cleft by a rectangular aperture as regular as if cut by
engineers; surmounting the barrier are two towering white cones, the
ghostly guardians of the gap. Another fascinating feature of the
panorama is the complex convergence of the battlemented mesa
promontories from all directions except the south; these carved and
tinted headlands actually seem to advance upon the beholder. In the east
are the pinnacled spires of the Eagle Crags, shattered to dagger
sharpness.

Rockville, another village beside the Virgin, was founded by Mormon
pioneers in 1861, and was long an important telegraph station. There is
a petrified forest in the vicinity.

About five miles beyond, the two profound chasms, the Mukuntuweap (Zion)
and the Parunuweap, converge; and the two sublime domes, the East and
West Temples, with their incredible crests of crimson bleeding down
their pale precipices, soar above the rushing waters. Springdale, the
last Mormon hamlet, is passed; then the Ranger Station at the southern
boundary of Zion National Park.

[Illustration: _The Great Bend of the Mukuntuweap, Zion National Park_]




                           Zion National Park


                           Legend and History

Zion National Park is a roughly quadrangular area of approximately 120
square miles, sixty-four miles by highway from Cedar City, and sixty
miles on an air line north of the rim of Grand Canyon. It was set apart
as a National Monument under its Indian name, _Mukuntuweap_, in 1909. In
1919 its area was enlarged, its name was changed to that given it by the
Mormon pioneers, and it was made a National Park.

There are cliff dwelling ruins in Zion Canyon, more in Parunuweap
Canyon, and the modern Indians had a reverent acquaintance with its
solemn amphitheatres. Several interpretations are given of its Indian
name, _Mukuntuweap_. Major Powell translated it “straight canyon;”
another interpretation is “place of many waters;” still another is
“place of the gods.” One legend declares that the Paru-sha-pats Indians
once saw a light upon the West Temple and supposed it to be a signal
fire to warn them of a Navajo raid. But they found that the West Temple
is unscalable and decided that friendly rock spirits had produced a
supernatural incandescence; and so, to them, it was “Rock-rover’s Land.”

It is certain that the Indians regarded Zion Canyon as a place sacred to
spiritual beings; they laid their propitiatory offerings of flesh and
fruit at the foot of the crimson crags of Sinawava and none would spend
a night in their shadows.

Mormon colonists entered the region about 1858, began its patient
reclamation by irrigation, and named the marvelous canyon Little Zion.
Major Powell, the famous explorer-geologist reconnoitered the country in
1870. A few years later Captain Dutton studied it and in “The Tertiary
History of the Grand Canyon District,” now out of print, presented a
picture that is “a classic of inspired description.” From that time
until 1909, except for the visits of a few artists and travelers of the
adventurous type, Zion was practically unknown. It may now be visited in
perfect comfort. Several colleges have sent classes there for summer
study.

     [Illustration: _The Mountain of Mystery, Zion National Park_]


                              Description

The outstanding feature of Zion National Park is Zion Canyon, the
stupendous red and white gorge cut by the Mukuntuweap River from the
Kolob Plateau through more than 3,000 feet of the Jurassic sandstones of
the White and Vermilion cliffs and down into lower beds of mauve
sandstone and shales of purple and red. The floor of Zion is 4,100 feet
above sea level; the dome of the West Temple rises to 7,650 feet. The
canyon is about fourteen miles long and varies in width from about a
mile at Springdale to scarcely more than the reach of a man’s
outstretched hands in the upper Narrows where the river has cut a
channel under the towering cliffs. Imagine, if you can, the overwhelming
effect of these painted precipices, nearly 2,000 feet high and both
close enough to be touched without moving.

                 [Illustration: _The Temples of Zion_]

In places the canyon widens into courts and shrines of bewitching
beauty, such as the Court of the Patriarchs and the Temple of Sinawava.
From the vermilion walls have been chiseled individual buttes and peaks
of monstrous greatness and surpassing majesty, among them Angels
Landing, the Great White Throne and the Mountain of Mystery. And these
soaring scarps and summits present such varied tints and hues of red
that the expert in pigments is bewildered; from the delicate pink of a
baby’s cheek to deepest carmine, and beyond--from bittersweet and orient
pink through orange chrome, flame-scarlet, vermilion, jasper, Pompeiian
red and Indian lake to mahogany, ox-blood, maroon and a red that is
almost black. In places the walls are topped with creamy white and the
green of pines. Everywhere they exhibit a wizardry of massive sculpture.
The deep-set river is bordered with the verdure of cottonwoods,
box-elders, pines, ferns and flowering shrubs; in mossy caves curtained
by little waterfalls, deer cradle their fawns. The radiance of the
morning and evening sun upon the tinted towers of Zion is among the
finest of its spectacles.

Standing upon the edge of the Park near Springdale is The Watchman, a
stately cathedral-like pile of red sandstone. About a mile beyond is
Bridge Mountain upon whose upper slope may be discerned a great bow of
stone, a natural bridge with a span of 100 feet. Among the Towers of the
Virgin stands the Altar of Sacrifice, a buttressed white fane whose
summit and wall are stained deep with flowing crimson, suggesting the
bloody sacrificial place of some insatiable pagan god. The East Temple,
on the right, is a splendid structure of pink and white surmounted by a
carmine capstone.

On the left is the Streaked Wall bearing strange white cones, and beyond
it is Sentinel Peak. The west wall then recedes to form the fine Court
of the Patriarchs whence rise the three stately Patriarchs themselves,
jagged pink and white pyramids. Above the east wall stand the Twin
Brothers and the Mountain-of-the-Sun, the latter the first to glow in
the light of dawn, the last to hold the evening rays. Lady Mountain, Mt.
Majestic and Red Arch Mountain next appear, and Angels Landing, a
sharp-shorn, pyramidal wedge of Pompeiian red that projects boldly into
the canyon and throws off from its foot a fluted ox-blood mass called
the Great Organ. Round this the river winds in a serpentine semicircle.

         [Illustration: _On the West Rim, Zion National Park_]


                         The Great White Throne

Just below the great bend in the Mukuntuweap River looms an isolated
rock temple of prodigious bulk and imperial majesty, a truncated pyramid
or mayhap a flattened dome, its lower half red, its upper half tinting
from rosy buff to white, a forest of tall pines, acres in extent, upon
its untrodden summit. This colossal butte, “one of the world’s great
rocks,” is seen most effectively from the Temple of Sinawava, through
the inverted maroon arch between the Great Organ and Angels Landing. It
appears completely detached from the east wall, aloof and unscalable.
While it has not been officially measured, its crest is probably more
than 3,000 feet above the river.

          [Illustration: _In the Narrows, Zion National Park_]

To the north is Cable Mountain, whence a rope of steel wire conveys
lumber to the valley from the forested plateau. Between it and the next
peak is Raining Cave and the site of a cliff dwelling.


                         The Temple of Sinawava

Beyond the bend the precipices of jasper red confine a flower-dotted
meadow shaded by trees, where sphinx-like figures, colossi, and
shattered pylons of warm and sombre reds suggest the Egyptian ruins at
Karnak and Thebes. Several obelisks rise isolated from the gardens of
the shrine. This is the beautiful Temple of Sinawava, the last of the
courts as one ascends the Canyon. It was here that President Harding
paid his tribute to Zion in 1923.


                              The Narrows

Half a mile beyond, the dragon’s-blood precipices become more
perpendicular and close in toward each other until the gorge seems
blocked, but a turn opens new vistas. Now, it is no more than
seventy-five feet from cliff to cliff and the stream stretches from wall
to wall. But there is one last glorious picture for those who must turn
back. A short distance farther up the gorge soars a slender, ethereal
cone of pink and white, a peak of such appealing symmetry and delicate
tints, so lofty and aspiring, that it evokes a cry of admiration. It is
the Mountain of Mystery.

       [Illustration: _One of the Amphitheatres of Cedar Breaks_]


                             The Wet Trail

The Canyon continues some eight miles farther, but its exploration is
only for the adventurous few. There is no trail but the winding river
which reaches from wall to wall; sudden rainstorms send between the
scarred and splintered cliffs a resistless torrent of water. With a
competent guide those in search of unusual thrills may ride horseback
several miles into the deep sunless cleft where great pendants of rock
overhang and shut out the sky; where the churning stream in flood has
left intricate cameos and arabesques upon the sandstone; where little
waterfalls leap from green ledges; where one may almost touch both
sombre walls with outstretched hands; where the stars may be seen by
day. Many a time the canyon seems to end with prison-like finality and
the sky seems lost forever. It is a travel adventure that may not be had
elsewhere and one never forgotten.


                           Zion from the Rims

Seen from above, the aspect of Zion is wholly different. Instead of a
relatively straight and orderly canyon dominantly red in color, it
becomes a fantastic maze of white and variegated buttes and cones. Mr.
Hal G. Evarts thus described in _The Saturday Evening Post_ his
impressions from the West Rim:

“It seemed that we gazed out across some vast oriental city that
stretched away for a dozen miles. Scores of gaudy mosques and tinted
towers, striped citadels topped by flat-roof gardens rose in countless
tiers from this congested, painted metropolis.... And the coloring!
Imagine a tremendous city of spires and turrets ..., its buildings
catching every dazzling reflection of the sunset.... There were soft
apricot and salmon tints, vague pinks and creams; lemon blending into
deepest orange, ... with here and there a haunting suggestion of pale
mauve. Brilliant red spires stood beside domes of ivory white. In many
of these fairy structures the stratifications pitched so abruptly as to
lend a spiralling, barber-pole effect....”

And Zion Canyon is but a part of Zion National Park.

        [Illustration: _The Painted Buttresses of Cedar Breaks_]


                       Cedar City to Cedar Breaks

Cedar Breaks is twenty-three miles by highway east of Cedar City and
four-fifths of a mile nearer the sky. Immediately east of the town the
road enters the rugged gorge of Coal Creek, its slopes covered with fine
forests of conifers and aspens. The walls assume impressive castellated
forms that are especially striking at the mouth of Ashdown Gorge, eight
miles distant. Ashdown Gorge is an extremely narrow, tortuous and
precipitous rift in the plateau, down which rushes a sparkling stream
from the vast furrows of Cedar Breaks. About one mile from the mouth and
high up the precipice is a natural bridge with an arch of about sixty
feet and a span of about seventy feet.

Following Coal Creek, ever upward, the road presently occupies a shelf
upon the shoulder of the Markagunt Plateau whence are revealed glorious
and almost illimitable panoramas. The whole sweep of the Terraced
Plateau country to the south is visible. Some twenty-five miles directly
south, slashed into the green of the Kolob Plateau, are the mazy,
white-topped temples and towers of Zion, the grand West Temple
dominating the scene. The sinuous profiles of the Pink, White and
Vermilion Cliffs are discernible; the hazy arch of the Kaibab; and the
misty dome of Navajo Mountain, beyond the Colorado. Several volcanic
peaks are in the foreground.

This immense range of visibility is one of the strong attractions of the
Terraced Plateau country; one sees again and again, in new and startling
aspects, the salient features of hundreds of square miles of territory
and its spectacular geological structure.

At Midway the road turns northward for three miles through stately
pines, firs and spruces and comes without warning to the abyss named
Cedar Breaks.

                     [Illustration: _Cedar Breaks_]




                              Cedar Breaks


Cedar Breaks is a series of vast amphitheatres eroded to a depth of
2,000 feet into the Pink Cliff formation at the summit of the Markagunt
Plateau and covering an area of approximately sixty square miles in the
Sevier National Forest. Its forested rim, 10,300 feet in elevation, has
been etched back into Blowhard Mountain and adjacent eminences; and a
short distance to the north the blunted volcanic crest of Brian Head
rises 900 feet higher, affording a panorama of practically all of
southern Utah, Nevada and northern Arizona.

Within its limitless labyrinths countless millions of grotesque and
magnificent architectural forms, anointed with all the colors of the
spectrum, flash into the eyes of the beholder. The erosional structures
are blends of Egyptian and massive medieval Gothic walls, modified in a
thousand surprising and original details, and rising generally from
far-flung, wedge-shaped base courses of white and orange. The colors
change marvelously in response to the sun; pink is dominant, though, at
times, orange tones seem to prevail. In broad aspect the color scheme is
pink, red, orange, yellow, white, lavender and purple, with intermediate
tints and hues that would form a dictionary of pigments; and on the
countless scalloped slopes appears the green of spruces, firs and pines.
An artist has counted more than sixty tints in Cedar Breaks.

There are six or seven great amphitheatres, semicircular or
three-quarter circles in shape, with sharp ridges radiating from rim to
center; the few trails into the abysmal serrate basins are faint and
obscure, yet the descent with a guide offers unsuspected marvels; then
only does one comprehend the immensity and the variety of Cedar Breaks.

Along the rims are several easily reached viewpoints, among them Point
Supreme and Point Perfection. Conspicuous in the welter of forms below
are innumerable red, castellated bastions in parallel rows; long,
writhing dragon-like forms of pure white; and huge sprawling dinosaurs
covered with blood. For all its beauty, the place might appropriately
have been the habitat of prehistoric monsters. The panoramas westward
across the deserts of the Great Basin are notably fine.

               [Illustration: _On the Rim, Cedar Breaks_]

In vastness, in variety of color, in wild grandeur, Cedar Breaks is the
greatest of Utah’s painted amphitheatres.


                      Cedar Breaks to Bryce Canyon

It is seventy miles from Cedar Breaks to Bryce Canyon. Crossing the
broad summit of the Markagunt Plateau the highway traverses fine
coniferous forests that frequently open into charming “parks,” and
passes great areas covered with lava from Hancock Peak and the adjacent
extinct volcanoes. Navajo Lake, a beautiful mountain tarn encircled by
pines and a noted fishing water, is about eight miles beyond Midway.

     [Illustration: _One of the Countless Castles of Bryce Canyon_]

Soon pretty Duck Creek, rising in full power from a fine spring and
filled with trout, parallels the highway for several miles, then
disappears under the volcanic rock. At the crossing of Strawberry Gulch
a little used trail extends southward to Strawberry Point, a famous
observation place on the Pink Cliffs. The main highway is alternately
surfaced with white, pink and red rock, a painted road in a land of
color.

At Cedar Breaks Junction, the route turns north, following the head
waters of the Sevier River, one of the most important streams of the
Great Basin; to the eastward, in the vicinity of Hatch, vistas of the
Pink Cliffs appear. Then the road crosses the Sevier and enters Red
Canyon.

The rich red turrets and towers at this canyon gateway are harmonious
introductions to the greater glories of Bryce. Once within its narrow
defile, the superb portal broadens into a little pine-dotted valley and
its walls display hundreds of spires, windowed walls, bridges, columns
and statue-like shapes of pink and ruby. The road, often running through
arches in the red cliffs, is as smooth as a boulevard. Next, the route
leads out upon the level, treeless surface of the Paunsaugunt Plateau,
and comes with startling unexpectedness to one of the splendid
amphitheatres of the Pahreah Basin.

            [Illustration: _Bryce Canyon National Monument_]




                     Bryce Canyon National Monument


Probably Bryce Canyon is the most astonishing blend of exquisite beauty
and grotesque grandeur that the forces of erosion have ever produced. In
one aspect it is a gorgeous lacework design of frost and fire, the
playground of sylphs and fairies; in another it is a smoldering inferno
habited by goblins and demons; again, it seems as if some cataclysmic
force had shuffled together a dozen oriental cities into one spectacular
municipality. The joyous prevailing colors of this immense bowl of
luminous, flickering filigree heaped with jewels, are pink, red, orange,
purple, yellow and white; to these may be added as many other tints and
tones as one has patience to distinguish. Though Bryce is immense, yet
it is intimate, presenting to the eye a scintillating coral intaglio of
bizarre but definite plan, overspread with a halo of lavender mist.

It is not a canyon, but an amphitheatre of horseshoe shape, graven 1,000
feet deep into the sandstones on the eastern edge of the Paunsaugunt
Plateau, at the headwaters of the Pahreah River; it is approximately two
miles wide and three miles long and its rim is 8,000 feet in elevation.
The area of Bryce Canyon National Monument, which was created in 1923
and is administered by the _U. S. Department of Agriculture_, is 7,440
acres.

In the maze of architecture uprising from Bryce’s sunken gardens, where
pine, spruce and manzanita spread their greens, there are the styles of
China and Egypt, of the Toltecs, Incas, Greeks and Goths; but stronger,
perhaps, is the resemblance to those decaying Dravidian temples,
bursting with decoration, in the jungles of Burmah and Java: pagodas,
mosques, minarets, kiosks, fairy castles, cathedrals, theatres, flying
buttresses and stairways, suspension bridges, niched and fenestrated
walls, peristyles, colonnades, lotus columns, leaning towers, slim
spires, massive pylons, pyramids, obelisks, pilasters capped by tilted
disks, cones supporting cones, organs, shrines and altars. All of the
architects of antiquity might have drawn their inspiration from the
silent cities of Bryce.

And these dream-tissue cities in the realm of muted mystery have weird
inhabitants statued in variegated stone: giants and gnomes, popes and
queens, kneeling penitents, companies of marching soldiers, gargoyles,
fauns, satyrs, nymphs, witches, horses, dogs, lizards, frogs and
turtles--figures that seem to move, sway and posture in the flashing
play of light and shadow. The least vivid imagination needs a checkrein.

            [Illustration: This map in a higher resolution]

             [Illustration: _The Cathedral, Bryce Canyon_]

In the east, on a headland of the Table Cliffs, an outlier of the vast
Aquarius Plateau, the mesa rises by ramps and colonnades of pink and
buff to a level esplanade where stand a dozen glorified
Acropolises,--façades, friezes, pillars and porticoes, in ruins of rosy
marble. There, as everywhere, the marionettes of the sun continually
perform their evanescent dances. And this is but a vista chosen at
random from a hundred glorious panoramas.

Farther in the east, the amphitheatre opens out to make way for the
headstreams of the Pahreah River; the green fields surrounding the
village of Tropic may be seen and the ramparts of the Kaiparowitz
Plateau.

Bryce should be seen from the west rim in the morning, from the east rim
in the afternoon. The exquisite pageant of shimmering tints begins when
dawn thrusts the first spears of light into the abysses. The best
effects are obtained when the formations are between the beholder and
the sun; it is then that the mysterious, lambent flames flicker in the
distant temples and play upon altars and columns, warming them into
living, glowing color. Trails extend in both directions along the rim of
the Canyon from Bryce Lodge and the vistas change with almost every step
taken.

Sunset upon Bryce Canyon is another breath-taking manifestation of
Nature’s magic, followed by a solemn twilight of the innumerable gods
that dwell there in pomp and splendor. The visitor should see both dawn
and dusk transform the great amphitheatre, and should see it sleeping in
the noonday light.

Every visitor should take the trail into the depths of Bryce Canyon,
either on foot or horseback. Lacy designs and dainty figures, seen from
the rim, assume huge proportions when one is amongst them; there are
sunless grottoes and shadowed crypts, wafer walls pierced by many
windows, artists’ studios filled with half-finished models and
figurines, innumerable fantastic forms in bronze, jasper, ruby amethyst,
topaz and alabaster. Each turn in every innumerable aisle, alley and
corridor on Bryce’s intricate floor has its charming revelations of
unimagined contour and color.

               [Illustration: _Trail into Bryce Canyon_]

           [Illustration: _Pillars of Pegasus, Bryce Canyon_]


       Zion Canyon to Kaibab Forest and North Rim of Grand Canyon

The highway crosses the _Rio Virgen_ at Rockville and climbs the
plateau, whence splendid views may be had of the Temples of Zion. Near
the Arizona boundary appear the magnificent Vermilion Cliffs which
stretch across Southern Utah for great distances; they present the
arresting architectural effects of vast castles and cathedrals colored
rich red which becomes vivid vermilion in the afternoon sun.

After crossing Short Creek into Arizona the immense blue arch of the
Kaibab Plateau becomes more prominent and Mt. Trumbull, an extinct
volcano overlooking Grand Canyon, looms in the purple distance. Upon
this stretch of fascinating desert range many wild horses, direct
descendants, perhaps, of those brought to America by the Spaniards. On
Cedar Ridge is a petrified forest.

The road follows the Vermilion Cliffs eastward through the Kaibab Indian
Reservation to Pipe Spring, a celebrated oasis on the plains, created a
National Monument in 1923. The two historic stone buildings standing
there were erected more than fifty years ago in fortress style for
protection from the Indians; from beneath one house flows the finest and
purest spring in all this frontier domain, daily discharging 100,000
gallons of cool water.

At Pipe Spring, the Vermilion Cliffs recede northward and give place to
the Shinarump Cliffs, banded with gorgeous colors--red, brown, lavender,
chocolate and white. A conspicuous butte seen approaching Fredonia is
The Battleship. Fredonia is a pretty little Mormon community of 300
inhabitants and the only town in Arizona north of the Grand Canyon.

Between Fredonia and the Kaibab is one of the most picturesque and
exquisitely colored stretches of upland in America. Whites, blacks,
browns, yellows, pinks, purples, reds and all their pale intermediate
tints are splashed over these prismatic plains, where cactus, yucca,
piñon, sage and cedar somehow find sustenance.

Almost imperceptibly, the automobile has climbed the gentle slopes of
the Kaibab. Looking backward to the north one of the grandest spectacles
of the Plateau Country is unfolded. Nearly 10,000 feet of terraced rock
layers are exposed edgewise across a frontage of some sixty miles. A
glorious panorama, these painted precipices! First the rainbow
Shinarump, then the Vermilion, White and Pink cliffs, tier upon tier and
hundreds of miles in convoluted length, all shining and shifting in the
sun.

         [Illustration: _Bryce Canyon from Inspiration Point_]

          [Illustration: _The Temple of Osiris, Bryce Canyon_]




                         Kaibab National Forest


Beautiful as are the plains, the transition to the limitless park-like
forests of the Kaibab is a welcome delight. Kaibab is a Piute Indian
word meaning “Mountain-lying-down,” a description that fits it well. It
is actually a vast plateau, some fifty miles long and thirty-five miles
wide, and containing 500 square miles of yellow pine, fir and spruce
diversified by charming aspen copses, the largest and most beautiful
virgin forest in the United States. In elevation it rises from 7,500 to
9,300 feet above sea level.

Kaibab Forest occupies the top of a lofty plateau isolated on the south
and east by the Grand Canyon, on the north and west by the mysterious
plains above which it rises 5,000 feet. On all sides are unexplored
plateaus and canyons where untouched cliff dwellings stand. Beneath its
stately trees the grassy forest floor is free from underbrush and fallen
timber, as clean as if raked daily by ten thousand foresters; and,
although they are not widely distributed, there are many lovely wild
flowers and ferns. Scattered throughout its great extent are spacious
“parks,” green-swarded, treeless open spaces bordered by white-boled,
quivering aspens, the advancing light cavalry of an innumerable army of
deploying pines. The witchery of these sylvan plaisances is wholly
irresistible; they seem designed for parades and pageants, for the
light-hearted moods of man and beast.

And so, indeed, they are employed. Afternoon and morning they are the
gathering places of many of the 30,000 black-tail mule deer that range
unfrightened through the forest. They do not require patient stalking to
be seen; crossing the forest one may usually count several hundred
haughty bucks, solicitous does, and adorable prancing fawns of exquisite
grace. Their only enemies are the cougars, much reduced in number by
“Uncle” Jimmy Owens, the government hunter who was Roosevelt’s guide,
and other official huntsmen. Second in interest of the Kaibab’s
creatures is the white-tailed squirrel (_Sciurus Kaibabensis_) which may
ordinarily be seen flickering through the forest near Jacobs Lake Ranger
Station. This is the most beautiful squirrel in the Western Hemisphere,
and one of the rarest, for it lives nowhere else. It is about the size
of a large gray squirrel, though shorter and stockier, is dark bluish
gray marked with brown, has long tufted ears and a broad feathery tail
that is almost pure white. Cougars and mountain sheep are rarely seen by
the ordinary traveler. Captain Dutton wrote of a visit to the Kaibab in
1880: “It is difficult to say precisely wherein the charm of the sylvan
scenery of the Kaibab consists. We, who through successive summers have
wandered through its forests and parks, have come to regard it as the
most enchanting region it has been our privilege to visit.

“There is a constant succession of parks and glades--dreamy avenues of
grass and flowers winding between sylvan walls, or spreading out in
broad open meadows.... The balmy air, the dark and sombre spruces, the
pale-green aspens, the golden shafts of sunshine shot through their
foliage, the velvet sward--surely this is the home of the woodland
nymphs.”

         [Illustration: _The Filigreed Walls of Bryce Canyon_]




                   The North Rim of the Grand Canyon


The Grand Canyon is the supreme epic of erosion; there water has
perpetuated its sublimest masterpiece in stone. “The Grand Canyon fills
me with awe,” wrote Roosevelt. “It is beyond comparison--beyond
description; absolutely unparalleled throughout the wide world.”
“Wildness so Godful, cosmic, primeval, bestows a new sense of the
earth’s beauty and size,” said John Muir. “By far the most sublime of
all earthly spectacles,” is the opinion of world travelers who have
studied its grandeur.

The Grand Canyon may be described as a vast and intricate range of
sunken mountains cut through a hundred miles of high plateau, “a
mountain chain reversed.” Usually it is pictured as a colossal chasm,
220 miles in length, a mile deep and some twelve miles wide; but it is
more precisely a measureless labyrinth of canyons with an infinite array
of magnificent architectural forms upthrust from their depths. Deep down
in the uttermost gorge of granite, the Colorado, “the rushingest,
roaringest” river in the land, grinds ceaselessly at the rocks.
Numberless rich and vivid tones of gray, green, blue, red and mauve tint
its mighty walls and temples, and, independent of these, the sunlight
pours daily into the chasm a shifting color parade of exquisite blues
and purples, glowing reds and golds.

Of the Kaibab division of the Grand Canyon, Captain Dutton states: “It
is the sublimest portion of the chasm, being nearly a thousand feet
deeper than any other, far more diversified and complex and is adorned
with a multitude of magnificent features, either wanting or much less
strongly represented elsewhere.” According to the _U. S. Geological
Survey_, the Kaibab division is from seven to fourteen miles wide and
from 5,300 to 6,000 feet deep. The elevation of the North Rim is from
8,000 to 9,000 feet and it is eroded extensively into tremendous lateral
gorges and amphitheatres. The North Rim has the incomparable Kaibab
Forest, uncounted unexplored cliff dwellings, and a summer climate
distinguished by unfailingly cool nights. Along its winding edge are a
number of noted capes and headlands that reveal some of the grandest
aspects of the Canyon.

             [Illustration: _Natural Bridge, Bryce Canyon_]

           [Illustration: _Bluebeard’s Castle, Bryce Canyon_]

Bright Angel Point stretches out between the Transept and Bright Angel
Canyon; from its dizzy tip may be seen many of the finest temples: Deva,
Brahma, Zoroaster, Wotan’s Throne, Manu, Buddha, Isis, Angels Gate and
Cheops Pyramid. Near by is a picturesque spring with a perfectly
preserved cliff dwelling adjacent. The Kaibab Trail descends from the
Point to the Suspension Bridge across the Colorado River, where it joins
the Bright Angel Trail to the South Rim.

Cape Royal, Cape Final and Point Imperial are on the huge Walhalla
Plateau (locally called “Greenland”) southeast of Bright Angel Camp, and
each reveals panoramas of greatest grandeur. Point Imperial, the highest
place on the Rim, affords views of the Marble Canyon, Lee’s Ferry,
Navajo Mountain and Houserock Valley. The wonderful views from Cape
Royal extend west, south and east over the templed gorge. On the way to
Cape Royal are Cliff Spring, many cliff dwelling ruins and Angels
Window.

Point Sublime, west of Bright Angel Point, is another celebrated
viewpoint, esteemed by Dutton to surpass all others. Thence may be seen
the Hindu and Aztec amphitheatres, Powell Plateau, the Dragon, the
Scorpion, and imperial Shiva, perhaps the most magnificent of all the
Canyon’s glorious temples.

Every visitor to the North Rim of Grand Canyon should make the trip to
Cape Royal and Point Sublime.

          [Illustration: _The Wall of Windows, Bryce Canyon_]

         [Illustration: _The Sculptor’s Studio, Bryce Canyon_]


           From the North Rim of Grand Canyon to Bryce Canyon

The route between Fredonia and the North Rim has been described on the
foregoing pages. North of Fredonia the way leads to Kanab, Utah, a
thriving village at the foot of the Vermilion Cliffs and 120 miles from
the nearest railroad. Thence it continues through the Vermilion Cliffs
by way of picturesque Three Lakes Canyon, across dunes of pink sand, and
down to the canyon of the Parunuweap, cut through the majestic White
Cliffs. Splendid panoramas of the temples and towers of Zion are
disclosed.

The highway follows Parunuweap River through Long Valley to its source,
passing the Mormon villages, Mt. Carmel, Orderville and Glendale. The
regions traversed are of unusual and unflagging scenic interest; many of
the rugged and tortuous side canyons, which contain cliff dwellings,
give glimpses of impressive formations.

The traveler ascends the Terraced Plateaus from the Shinarump and the
Vermilion to the Pink Cliffs, vivid exposures of which, capped by lava,
may be seen on distant eminences. Chamberlain’s Lake, north of Glendale,
is a deep, cold tarn fed by a great spring. At Cedar Breaks Junction the
road crosses from the Colorado drainage system into the Great Basin. The
remainder of the route to Bryce Canyon has been described on page 22.




                         Now Easy To Get There


Zion National Park, Bryce Canyon National Monument, Cedar Breaks, Kaibab
National Forest and the North Rim of Grand Canyon are reached via the
through service of the Union Pacific System by way of Lund, Utah, to
Cedar City, Utah, the railroad terminus. Lund is on the main line of the
Union Pacific to Southern California, 243 miles southwest of Salt Lake
City, 541 miles northeast of Los Angeles. From Lund a branch line of the
Union Pacific extends thirty-three miles southeastward to Cedar City.
During the season through sleeping cars are operated from Salt Lake City
to Cedar City and all through trains will stop at Lund, whence there is
direct connecting service to Cedar City.

          [Illustration: _The Goblins’ Grotto, Bryce Canyon_]

          [Illustration: _Spires and Minarets, Bryce Canyon_]

Very low round-trip Summer Excursion Fares, with liberal limits and
stop-over privileges, are in effect during the season to Cedar City and
the scenic regions of Southern Utah. Likewise, low side-trip excursion
fares to Cedar City and return are available for Pacific Coast
passengers traveling via the Union Pacific System; $2.10 from Lund for
those en route to or from Southern California, and $13.75 from Salt Lake
City for those en route to San Francisco, the Pacific Northwest or
Yellowstone Park, during the season.

From Cedar City the Utah Parks Company, a subsidiary of the Union
Pacific System, operates on regular schedules during the season a fleet
of powerful eleven-passenger automobiles of the latest and most
comfortable design to Zion National Park, Cedar Breaks and Bryce Canyon
National Monument. Automobiles of the Utah & Grand Canyon Transportation
Company (operated independently), also maintaining regular schedules,
connect at Zion Park and at Bryce Canyon for the Kaibab Forest and the
North Rim of Grand Canyon. There are good roads, constantly being
improved, between Cedar City and Zion National Park, Cedar Breaks and
Bryce Canyon National Monument; the roads between Zion Canyon and Bryce
Canyon and the North Rim of Grand Canyon are fair, safe to travel, and
are also undergoing improvement. Excellent lodges and camps are
maintained at places where stop-overs are desirable.

The schedules of the automobiles, fares, accommodation at lodges, etc.,
are shown in detail on pages 39 to 43. Advance reservations made through
any Union Pacific representative listed on page 47 will insure
accommodations in automobiles, as well as at the lodges and camps.
Inasmuch as the trip to Zion, Bryce and the North Rim of Grand Canyon is
one of unusual character, unlike, in fact, any other in the United
States, the traveler is urged to use the services of a Union Pacific
representative in planning his itinerary. This may be done by letter,
telephone or personal call; there is no charge for the service.

            [Illustration: _Deer in Kaibab National Forest_]


                           Season and Climate

The season in Zion National Park is from May 15 to October 15; at Bryce
Canyon and the North Rim of Grand Canyon from June 1 to October 15.
Dates of operation and conditions are shown in connection with all tours
on pages 39-40-41.

The climate in Zion National Park is mild throughout the season. At
Bryce Canyon and Cedar Breaks, farther north and at higher elevations,
cool weather may be expected at night both early and late in the season.
In the Kaibab Forest and at the North Rim of Grand Canyon, cool nights
are to be expected.

Southern Utah and Northern Arizona are regions of clear, dry, sunny
days, delightfully exhilarating and followed by refreshing nights. There
are occasional showers throughout the country during the summer season.




                               Cedar City


  Gateway to Zion National Park, Bryce Canyon National Monument, Cedar
      Breaks, Kaibab Forest, North Rim Grand Canyon National Park

All automobile tours start at Cedar City, Utah, a prosperous and
picturesque Mormon city of 3,000 inhabitants, on the edge of the
Escalante Plain, at the foot of the Markagunt Plateau, at an elevation
of 5,750 feet. Coming from Lund, one may glimpse in the distant east and
nearly 5,000 feet above him, some of the rosy palisades of Cedar Breaks.

Cedar City has a good hotel, water system, electric lights, a bank,
photoplay theatre, well stocked stores, hospital, Carnegie Library,
Mormon Tabernacle, a branch of the State Agricultural College, and a new
and handsome railway station. On the edge of the town is a band of Piute
Indians, the original inhabitants of the country, who sell buckskin
gloves, moccasins and other articles. The prosperity of Cedar City is
derived from sheep, wool, cattle, agriculture and the recent development
of vast deposits of iron in the Iron Mountains, twelve miles away. The
community, founded by Mormon leaders in 1851, was named from the
abundance of cedar trees in the vicinity.


                           El Escalante Hotel

This handsome new Union Pacific hotel at Cedar City would be an
outstanding establishment in a metropolis. It is a three-story structure
of cream brick with sweeping wings and a broad verandah; seventy-five
guest rooms with tub and shower baths; a spacious dining room; a banquet
room, ballroom, billiard room, barber shop, and a luxurious lobby. The
dining-room service is of the highest metropolitan standard and many
delicacies from the local markets are included in the menus. El
Escalante Hotel, named after Padre Sylvestre de Escalante, the Spanish
explorer-priest who was the first white man to visit the region (1776),
is adjacent to the Union Pacific Station. Reservations and arrangements
for any automobile tours may be made in the lobby.

            [Illustration: _In the Kaibab National Forest_]


                  Accommodations in Zion National Park

The Utah Parks Company maintains in Zion National Park, in a beautiful
court beside the Mukuntuweap River at the foot of Red Arch Mountain and
near the Great White Throne, one of the finest viewpoints in the Canyon,
a handsome rustic Lodge Center and forty-six double guest lodges,
accommodating 184 persons.

The Lodge Center is a two-story structure of native pine, with
foundations and columns of rubble masonry. There is a broad verandah, a
spacious lobby and lounging room, with a huge fireplace of rough stone,
Navajo rugs, a radio set, retiring rooms and shower baths for men and
women on the main floor. The attractive and commodious dining room,
accommodating 100 guests, also with a fireplace, is on the second floor.

Each room in the cosy double lodges of native pine and fir is separate
and private, although two may be used en suite by family parties. The
rooms contain two single beds or one double bed, a stove, dressing
table, chairs, rugs, and are lighted by two double windows. All of the
furnishings are new and thoroughly comfortable and the service is
thoughtful and courteous. The evening camp fire is a pleasing feature.
Zion Lodge is a delightful place to linger.

          [Illustration: _Sunset at North Rim, Grand Canyon_]


                     What To Do in Zion--the Trails

The visitor who merely rides in an automobile to Zion Lodge and goes no
farther will obtain an entirely inadequate impression of its beauty.

There are two trips that none should miss. One is to the Narrows. An
automobile road extends to the Temple of Sinawava, whence it is a walk
of about two miles; or, horses may be ridden all the way from the Lodge,
a distance of about six miles. The other trip is up the spectacular West
Rim Trail either to the West Rim, with a nine-mile loop on the crest (an
all-day trip) or to Angels Landing (a half-day trip); the West Rim Trail
is perhaps one of the most scenic in the entire National Park System.
There is also a trail up Cable Mountain to the East Rim, where splendid
panoramas are unfolded. The trail up Lady Mountain, two miles in length,
has 1,400 steps chiseled from the rock, two ladders and 2,000 feet of
hand cable. A short walk east from the Lodge leads to a pretty waterfall
and a rock-bound pool. Other interesting little excursions may be made
and the guides will gladly give suggestions.


                     Accommodations at Bryce Canyon

The Utah Parks Company maintains near the rim of Bryce Canyon an
attractive rustic Lodge Center with a portico supported by massive logs.
Bryce Lodge Center contains a hospitable lobby and lounge carpeted with
Navajo rugs, and with a fireplace, a spacious dining room accommodating
100 guests, radio set, and retiring rooms and shower baths for men and
women on the main floor.

In the pines adjacent to the Lodge Center are forty-six double guest
lodges of native pine, accommodating 184 persons; each chamber is
separate and private although they may be used en suite, if desired.
Each room contains two single beds or one double bed, stove, dressing
table, chairs, rugs and two double windows, all new, comfortable and
kept in spotless condition. Bryce Lodge is a short distance from the rim
of the Canyon at one of its most enchanting viewpoints. There is a camp
fire gathering each night.

     [Illustration: _Bright Angel Point, North Rim, Grand Canyon_]


   Accommodations at the North Rim of Grand Canyon and in the Kaibab
                               Forest[2]

On the North Rim of Grand Canyon, adjacent to Bright Angel Point, is the
“Wylie” Bright Angel Camp consisting of a central dining tent and social
room and comfortable tent cottages accommodating forty persons.
Wholesome food is served and all of the camp accessories are spotlessly
clean. “Wylie” Bright Angel Camp is under the management of Mrs.
Elizabeth Wylie McKee.

V. T. Park Tourist Ranch, in DeMotte Park about eighteen miles north of
Bright Angel Point, consists of a central dining pavilion seating ninety
persons, and a recreation hall, ten log cabins and a dormitory
accommodating seventy-five persons. Wholesome food and clean quarters
may be had at V. T. Park Ranch, which is under the management of W. S.
Rust.


                       All-Expense Escorted Tours

Two weeks special vacation tours of Zion National Park, Cedar Breaks,
Bryce Canyon National Monument and Colorado will leave Chicago every
Saturday commencing June 20th and continuing through the season. These
tours are at moderate cost, are escorted by a courteous, well-informed
travel representative who relieves you of all the details by arranging
for tickets, sleeping car and hotel reservations, automobile
transportation, baggage transfers, sight-seeing guides, side-trips,
etc., leaving you free to sit back, relax, and enjoy every minute of
your vacation.

Similar tours are conducted to Yellowstone National Park and to
California. Schedules permit each tour to be combined with any other;
travelers may select a combination that appeals to individual
inclination.

These tours are maintained by the Chicago & North Western Ry. and the
Union Pacific System.

For complete information apply to

                        C. J. Collins, _Manager_
                          Department of Tours
                          148 South Clark St.
                             Chicago, Ill.

          [Illustration: _Red Canyon Highway, Southern Utah_]




                            THE 1926 SEASON

At Zion National Park, Bryce Canyon National Monument, Cedar Breaks,
North Rim Grand Canyon and intermediate scenic regions is June 1 to
October 1.

The schedules of motor bus tours shown herein are substantially correct
except that improvement in road conditions has made possible in some
instances faster schedules between points shown.

The 1926 edition of this booklet will be correct in all particulars.


   Utah Parks Company Automobile Tours from Cedar City, Utah, to Zion
               National Park, Cedar Breaks, Bryce Canyon
                                  and
  Utah & Grand Canyon Transportation Co. Tours from Zion National Park
             and Bryce Canyon to North Rim of Grand Canyon

The schedules and routes of the automobile tours shown herein are
subject to such changes of operating convenience or necessity as may
result from weather or road conditions.

(_Note_: The Union Pacific System shows herein the tours of the Utah &
Grand Canyon Transportation Co. between Zion National Park and Grand
Canyon, and between Bryce Canyon and Grand Canyon, merely as a matter of
information, and does not assume any responsibility therefor. All other
tours shown herein are operated by the Utah Parks Co., a subsidiary of
the Union Pacific System.)

                      No. 1--TO ZION NATIONAL PARK
                      (Season, May 15 to Oct. 15)

            _1st day_-- Lv. Cedar City               8.30 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Zion National Park        12.00 m.
            _2d day_--  Lv. Zion National Park       2.30 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar City               6.00 p.m.

Automobile fare $15.00.

All-expense, including automobile transportation, four meals and one
lodging in the Park, $21.25. From May 15 to June 10, and from Sept. 15
to Oct. 15, this tour will be operated only for a minimum of three full
fares.

                         No. 2--TO CEDAR BREAKS
                      (Season, June 1 to Oct. 15)

            _1st day_-- Lv. Cedar City               9.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar Breaks            11.00 a.m.
                 ”      Lv. Cedar Breaks             3.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar City               5.30 p.m.

Automobile fare, $7.50.

This tour will be operated only for a minimum of four full fares. Box
lunch, price $1.00, will be carried from Cedar City.

                         No. 3--TO BRYCE CANYON
                      (Season, June 1 to Oct. 15)

            _1st day_-- Lv. Cedar City               8.30 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar Breaks            10.30 a.m.
                 ”      Lv. Cedar Breaks             1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Bryce Canyon             4.30 p.m.
            _2d day_--  Lv. Bryce Canyon             1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar City               6.30 p.m.

Automobile fare, $20.00.

All-expense, including automobile transportation, box lunch at Cedar
Breaks, three meals and lodging at Bryce Canyon, $26.00. From June 1 to
June 10 and from Sept. 15 to Oct. 15, this tour will be operated only
for a minimum of three full fares.

 [Illustration: _Salt Lake City, Utah, Showing Mormon Temple and State
                               Capitol_]

             No. 4--TO ZION NATIONAL PARK, AND BRYCE CANYON
                      (Season, June 1 to Oct. 15)

Schedule of this tour is combination of No. 1 and No. 3. Automobile
fare, $35.00. All-expense, including automobile transportation, four
meals and one lodging at Zion Park, box lunch at Cedar Breaks, and three
meals and one lodging at Bryce Canyon, $47.25. Expenses at Cedar City
are not included. From June 1 to June 10, and from Sept. 15 to Oct. 15,
this tour will be operated only for a minimum of three full fares.

          [Illustration: Roads mentioned in tour itineraries]

                   No. 5--TO NORTH RIM, GRAND CANYON
                      (Season, June 1 to Oct. 15)

            _1st day_-- Lv. Cedar City               8.30 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Zion National Park        12.00 m.
            _2d day_--  Lv. Zion National Park       8.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Pipe Spring               12.00 m.
                 ”      Lv. Pipe Spring              1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Kaibab Forest            6.00 p.m.
            _3d day_--  Lv. Kaibab Forest            8.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Grand Canyon             9.00 a.m.
            _4th day_-- Lv. Grand Canyon             8.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Kanab                     12.00 m.
                 ”      Lv. Kanab                    1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Bryce Canyon             6.00 p.m.
            _5th day_-- Lv. Bryce Canyon             1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar Breaks             3.30 p.m.
                 ”      Lv. Cedar Breaks             4.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar City               6.30 p.m.

Automobile fare, $65.00.

All-expense tour, including automobile transportation, three meals and
one lodging at Zion National Park, box lunch at Pipe Spring, two meals
and one lodging at V. T. Park in Kaibab Forest, three meals and one
lodging at North Rim of Grand Canyon, lunch at Kanab and three meals and
one lodging at Bryce Canyon, $86.75. From June 1 to June 10, and from
Sept. 15 to Oct. 15, the portion of this tour between Cedar City and
Zion National Park and Bryce Canyon will be operated only for a minimum
of three full fares, and the portion from Zion National Park to Grand
Canyon and return to Bryce Canyon, which will be operated by the Utah &
Grand Canyon Transportation Co., only for a minimum of three full fares
at any time.

                   No. 6--TO NORTH RIM, GRAND CANYON
                      (Season, June 1 to Oct. 15)

            _1st day_-- Lv. Cedar City               8.30 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar Breaks            10.30 a.m.
                 ”      Lv. Cedar Breaks             1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Bryce Canyon             4.30 p.m.
            _2d day_--  Lv. Bryce Canyon             9.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Kanab                    1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Lv. Kanab                    2.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Kaibab Forest            6.00 p.m.
            _3d day_--  Lv. Kaibab Forest            8.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Grand Canyon             9.00 a.m.
            _4th day_-- Lv. Grand Canyon             8.00 a.m.
                 ”      Ar. Fredonia                  12.00 m.
                 ”      Lv. Fredonia                 1.00 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Zion National Park       6.00 p.m.
            _5th day_-- Lv. Zion National Park       2.30 p.m.
                 ”      Ar. Cedar City               6.00 p.m.

         [Illustration: _El Escalante Hotel, Cedar City, Utah_]

Automobile fare, $65.00.

All-expense tour, including automobile transportation, box lunch at
Cedar Breaks, two meals and one lodging at Bryce Canyon, lunch at Kanab,
two meals and one lodging at V. T. Park in Kaibab Forest, three meals
and one lodging at North Rim of Grand Canyon, lunch at Fredonia, and
three meals and one lodging at Zion National Park, $86.50. From June 1
to June 10, and from Sept. 15 to Oct. 15, the portion of this tour
between Cedar City and Bryce Canyon and Zion National Park will be
operated only for a minimum of three full fares, and the portion from
Bryce Canyon to Grand Canyon and return to Zion National Park will be
operated by the Utah & Grand Canyon Transportation Co. only for a
minimum of three full fares at any time.

_Note_: As tour No. 6 is merely the reverse of tour No. 5, the diagram
in connection with the latter will indicate also the outline of tour No.
6.

                             ONE-WAY TOURS
                  To and From North Rim, Grand Canyon

Persons desiring to make only the one-way trip between Cedar City and
Grand Canyon, crossing from the North Rim to South Rim, or vice versa,
may avail themselves of the portions of tours Nos. 5 and 6, as may be
necessary, at following fares:

One way between Cedar City and Grand Canyon, via Zion National Park,
$40.00. One way between Cedar City and Grand Canyon, via Bryce Canyon,
$45.00. These tours will not be operated for less than three full fares.

As a matter of information, the trip across Grand Canyon requires two
days and is made on horseback. The night is spent at Phantom Ranch, at
the bottom of the Canyon and the Rim is reached the following afternoon.
The cost, including horse, four meals, and one lodging is approximately
$30.00 per person, guide extra.

                       SPECIAL AUTOMOBILE SERVICE

Special automobiles (six passenger touring cars) may be chartered for
any scheduled tour, for exclusive use, on basis of $25.00 per day, or
part thereof, over and above the regular automobile per capita fare (see
pages 39 and 40) for each person for tour availed of: the minimum for
such special service will be 5 full fares plus the $25.00 per day or
part thereof. If there are more than six persons in party, an eleven
passenger type of car, if desired and if circumstances permit, will be
furnished on the same per capita basis, plus $25.00 per day or part
thereof.

                                BOOKINGS

The Union Pacific System maintains in many of the principal cities of
the United States, also in Toronto, Ont., representatives who will
gladly assist in making advance reservations at the lodges and camps.
This service, and any information at the command of these
representatives, is furnished, without charge, for the asking or
writing. Their names and addresses are listed on Page 47.


                          General Information


                           Excursion Tickets

From approximately May 15th to September 30th of each year, round-trip
excursion tickets at very low fares are sold from various points in the
United States and Canada to Cedar City, Utah, the rail terminus and the
gateway to the scenic attractions in Southern Utah, also via Cedar City
to Zion National Park, coupons for latter being exchangeable for those
covering any other of the tours shown on pages 39-40-41 upon payment of
difference in fares; or coupons from Cedar City for any of the tours,
including automobile transportation, and also, if desired,
accommodations at the resort lodges, may be obtained at same price upon
arrival at Cedar City.

Railroad tickets from eastern points when routed via the Union Pacific
System are honored without extra charge via Denver, thus affording
opportunity to visit Rocky Mountain National Park.

           [Illustration: _Dining Room, El Escalante Hotel_]

             [Illustration: _Bedroom, El Escalante Hotel_]


                       Cedar City As a Side Trip

Holders of one-way or excursion tickets to Pacific Coast, or to
Yellowstone Park, via the Union Pacific System, may obtain stopover at
Salt Lake City, whence a low side-trip excursion fare is in effect
during the season for Southern Utah visitors. Or if the through ticket
is to or from Southern California via Union Pacific System, stopover may
be made at Lund, Utah, whence there is also a low side-trip excursion
fare to Cedar City, only thirty-two miles from Lund.


                                Baggage

Baggage must not be checked beyond Cedar City. The automobiles of the
Utah Parks Co. will carry not to exceed forty pounds of hand baggage
free.

Storage charges will be waived on baggage left at Union Pacific System
stations, Salt Lake City, Ogden, Lund, Cedar City, and Los Angeles, by
passengers making any of the tours of the Utah Parks Co. from Cedar
City.


                              What To Wear

Warm clothing should be worn and one should be prepared for the sudden
changes of temperature common at elevations of from 8,000 to 9,000 feet.
Medium weight overcoats, jackets or sweaters should be taken. Outing
clothes, including riding breeches, stout shoes and puttees, or boots,
and serviceable gloves will add to the comfort of men and women who wish
to ride horseback, tramp or climb. Bring your camera. Field glasses are
useful.

              [Illustration: _Lobby, El Escalante Hotel_]


                             Accommodations

CEDAR CITY--El Escalante Hotel, operated by the Union Pacific System, is
a new, modern, commodious brick hotel, first class in all its
appointments and service. Rates, without bath, $1.50 to $2.50 per day
for one person, and $2.50 to $4.00 per day for two persons; with bath
$3.00 to $4.00 per day for one person and $5.00 to $6.00 per day for two
persons. Meals a la carte at reasonable rates.

ZION NATIONAL PARK--A handsome lodge operated by the Utah Parks Co.
during the Park season affords comfortable accommodations at following
rates: breakfast $1.00; lunch $1.25; dinner $1.50; lodging $1.75.
American plan rate per day $5.50.

BRYCE CANYON--The attractive, comfortable lodge situated near the rim of
the Canyon is operated by the Utah Parks Co.: breakfast $1.00; lunch
$1.25; dinner $1.50; lodging $1.75. American plan rate per day $5.50.

GRAND CANYON (NORTH RIM)--Bright Angel “Wylie” Camp (operated by Mrs.
Elizabeth McKee), situated near Bright Angel Point within the boundaries
of the Grand Canyon National Park, has the following rates: breakfast
$1.50; lunch $1.50; dinner $1.50; lodging $1.50. American plan rate per
day $6.00.

V. T. PARK--A camp in the Kaibab National Forest (operated by W. S.
Rust), en route to, and about eighteen miles from, Bright Angel Point,
Grand Canyon, is known as the V. T. Park Tourist Ranch: breakfast $1.00;
lunch $1.25; dinner $1.25; lodging $1.50. American plan rate per day
$5.00.

        [Illustration: _Zion Lodge Center, Zion National Park_]


                        Saddle Horses and Guides

Saddle horses and competent guides are available for all of the
interesting trail trips at reasonable rates approved by the United
States National Park Service.

          AT ZION PARK (FLOOR OF CANYON) AND AT BRYCE (ON RIM)

           _Rates per Person per Hour (or Fraction)_
                           Without Guide       With Mounted Guide
  One Person                  $1.00                  $3.00
  Two Persons                  1.00                   1.50
  Three Persons                1.00                   1.00
            _Rates per Person per Half Day, 4 Hours_
  One Person                  $2.50                  $7.50
  Two Persons                  2.50                   3.75
  Three Persons                2.50                   2.50
              _Rates per Person per Day, 8 Hours_
  One Person                  $3.50                  $8.50
  Two Persons                  3.50                   5.25
  Three Persons                3.50                   3.50

       AT ZION PARK (EAST OR WEST RIM) AND AT BRYCE (INTO CANYON)

    _Rates per Person per Day (8 Hours) with Mounted Guide_
  One Person                                        $10.00
  Two Persons                                         7.50
  Three Persons                                       5.00

A half-day (4 hours) trip, with mounted guide, into Bryce Canyon is also
available at following rates: one person, $9.00; two persons, $4.50
each; three or more persons, $3.00 each.

Saddle horses and guides are also available at V. T. Park Tourist Ranch
in Kaibab Forest, and at Bright Angel “Wylie” Camp, North Rim of Grand
Canyon, at reasonable rates approved by the Forest Service and the
National Park Service, respectively.


                               Elevations

                                                          Feet
       Cedar City                                        5,750
       Rim of Great Basin                                5,500
       Pine Valley Mountains                            10,250
       Toquerville                                       3,100
       Floor of Zion Canyon                              4,100
       Summit of West Temple                             7,650
       Cedar Breaks (Rim)                               10,300
       Brian Head                                       11,300
       Navajo Lake                                       9,500
       Cedar Breaks Junction                             7,000
       Bryce Canyon (Rim)                                8,000
       Pipe Spring                                       5,000
       Fredonia                                          4,700
       V. T. Park Tourist Ranch                          8,700
       Bright Angel Camp (North Rim, Grand Canyon)       8,300
       Bright Angel Point (North Rim, Grand Canyon)      8,153
       Point Imperial (North Rim, Grand Canyon)          9,000
       Cape Royal (North Rim, Grand Canyon)              7,876
       Cape Final (North Rim, Grand Canyon)              7,919
       Point Sublime (North Rim, Grand Canyon)           7,464
       Kanab                                             4,925

 [Illustration: _Lodge Center at Bryce Canyon and (Inset) Typical Guest
                                Lodge_]


                           Table of Distances

                              BY RAILROAD

                                                                   Miles
  Salt Lake City, Utah, to Cedar City, Utah                          275
  Los Angeles, Calif., to Cedar City, Utah                           574
  Lund, Utah, to Cedar City, Utah                                   32.5

                               BY HIGHWAY

  Cedar City to Toquerville                                         36.2
  Cedar City to Zion National Park (Entrance)                       62.1
  Cedar City to Zion Lodge                                          64.8
  Cedar City to Midway                                              19.9
  Cedar City to Cedar Breaks Jctn                                     45
  Cedar City to Cedar Breaks                                          23
  Cedar City to Bryce Canyon National Monument                        89
  Cedar City to Pipe Spring National Monument                       94.6
  Cedar City to Fredonia                                           109.7
  Cedar City to V. T. Park Tourist Ranch                             165
  Cedar City to Bright Angel Point (North Rim, Grand Canyon        200.8
      National Park, via Zion National Park)
  Zion National Park to Pipe Spring                                   45
  Zion National Park to Fredonia                                      60
  Zion National Park to Bright Angel Point (North Rim, Grand         136
      Canyon National Park)
  Cedar Breaks to Midway                                             3.1
  Cedar Breaks to Navajo Lake                                       10.1
  Cedar Breaks to Cedar Breaks Junction                               28
  Cedar Breaks to Red Canyon                                          56
  Cedar Breaks to Bryce Canyon National Monument                      70
  Bright Angel Point (North Rim, Grand Canyon) to V. T. Park          18
      Tourist Ranch
  Bright Angel Point to Fredonia                                    75.6
  Bright Angel Point to Kanab                                       82.4
  Bright Angel Point Cedar Breaks Jctn                               123
  Bright Angel Point to Bryce Canyon National Monument             164.2

                                BY TRAIL

  Zion Lodge to Great White Throne                                     2
  Zion Lodge to The Narrows                                            6
  Zion Lodge to Summit of Angels Landing                             2.5
  Zion Lodge to Observation Point                                     12
  Zion Lodge to West Rim                                              12
  Zion Lodge to Ranger Station                                         5
  Zion Lodge to Summit of Lady Mountain                                2
  Bryce Canyon Lodge to floor of Canyon and return                     1
  Bryce Canyon Lodge to Tropic                                        11
  Bright Angel Camp to Bright Angel Point                             .5
  Bright Angel Camp to Point Imperial                                  9
  Bright Angel Camp to Cape Final                                     12
  Bright Angel Camp to Cliff Spring                                   15
  Bright Angel Camp to Cape Royal                                     16
  Bright Angel Camp to Cliff Dweller Spring                            1
  Bright Angel Camp to Point Sublime                                  35
  V. T. Park Tourist Ranch to Point Imperial                          22
  V. T. Park Tourist Ranch to Cape Final                              25
  V. T. Park Tourist Ranch to Point Sublime                           23

 [Illustration: _Interior of Guest Lodge, Zion National Park and Bryce
                                Canyon_]


   Stratified Rocks of Cedar Breaks, Bryce Canyon, Zion Canyon, Grand
                    Canyon and Intermediate Regions

Rearranged and visualized principally from unpublished studies of Willis
T. Lee, by courtesy of the National Parks Association.

These strata presumably were once continuous over the entire Plateau
Region and the Grand Canyon. Many were much thicker than now, having
been eroded during long periods when the surface was temporarily lifted
above sea level. Altogether they may cover a creative period exceeding
ninety million years. Strata are said to be unconformable when they do
not lie in regular, parallel sequence.

Read table from bottom upward for historical sequence.

             1.--FROM BRYCE CANYON TO THE GRAND CANYON RIM

Cedar Breaks, some 2,000 feet higher than Bryce Canyon, is eroded from
similar formation to that at Bryce Canyon.

 FORMATION       PRESENT  GEOLOGICAL                     DESCRIPTION
                  DEPTH   AGE
                (_Feet_)
  Basalt                                  Bryce   Sheets of very dark lava,
                                                  resting unconformably upon
                                                  the Pink Cliff below.
  Pink Cliff          500  Eocene         ″ Richly colored shales,
                                                  limestones and conglomerates,
                                                  most of them red, and
                                                  containing fossils.
  Cretaceous Rocks   3000  Upper                  Gray to buff sandstone and
                           Cretaceous             drab shales, alternating with
                                                  occasional coal beds.
  McElmo Formation    800  Lower                  Shales and sandstones of many
                           Cretaceous             colors.
  Jurassic Rocks      600  Jurassic               Drab shale, chocolate colored
                                                  limestone and occasional gray
                                                  gypsum beds.
  White Cliff        1000  Jurassic        Zion   White, cross-bedded
                                                  sandstone. Modern geology
                                                  considers the White and
                                                  Vermilion Cliffs part of the
                                                  same formation, but
                                                  scenically they will always
                                                  be distinguished.
  Vermilion Cliff    2000  Jurassic       ″ Brilliant red, variegated,
                                                  massive sandstone.
  Chinle Formation    350  Late Triassic  ″ Mauve sandstone above, purple
                                                  and red shale below.
  Shinarump           100  Late Triassic          Brown, yellow and gray
    Conglomerate                                  conglomerate and sandstone,
                                                  celebrated for its petrified
                                                  trees.
  Moenkopi           1600  Early                  Purple, yellowish-gray, dull
    Formation              Triassic               red and coffee-brown
                                                  sandstones, in a great body
                                                  of rich red shale. Contains a
                                                  few layers of hard red, brown
                                                  and gray limestone and some
                                                  light-colored gypsum beds.
                                                  Known also as the Belted
                                                  Shales.
  Kaibab Limestone   1800  Late                   The same gray, massive
                           Carboniferous          limestone seen on the Rim of
                                                  the Grand Canyon. The road
                                                  from Cedar City to Zion
                                                  Canyon runs over it for
                                                  several miles.

          II.--FROM THE GRAND CANYON RIM TO THE GRANITE GORGE

  Kaibab Limestone    800  Late            Grand  Gray limestone formed in the
                           Carboniferous  Canyon  sea, as indicated by many
                                                  Carboniferous fossil shells.
                                                  At the Grand Canyon it is the
                                                  surface rock. In the Plateau
                                                  Country to the north, it lies
                                                  at the bottom of the series.
  Coconino            300  Carboniferous  ″ Very massive, cross-bedded
                                                  yellow sandstone.
  Supai Formation    1100  Carboniferous  ″ Alternating red shale and red
                                                  and brown sandstone, the
                                                  latter forming low cliffs.
                                                  This constitutes the greatest
                                                  red body of the Canyon wall.
  Redwall Limestone   600  Carboniferous  ″ Extremely hard blue or gray
                                                  limestone, forming the
                                                  greatest cliff of the Grand
                                                  Canyon. It is stained a vivid
                                                  red by the wash of the red
                                                  Supai shales above. The cliff
                                                  is a conspicuous feature of
                                                  the Canyon everywhere.
  Missing Strata           Devonian       ″ During Devonian, Silurian and
                           Silurian               Ordovician times, extensive
                           Ordovician             strata were deposited upon
                                                  the Cambrian rocks below, but
                                                  were wholly eroded away
                                                  during a long uplift period
                                                  and the limestone known as
                                                  the Red Wall was deposited on
                                                  the Tonto during a succeeding
                                                  period.
  Tonto Group         950  Cambrian       ″ Olive green shale and
                                                  limestone, forming the broad
                                                  green floor of the Grand
                                                  Canyon, through which winds
                                                  the Granite Gorge.
  Unkar and Chuar          Algonkian      ″ Greenish sandstones, fine
    Groups known as                               quartzites and vividly red
    the Grand                                     shales, once 13,000 feet
    Canyon Series                                 thick, but here eroded away
                                                  till they appear only in
                                                  places.
  Granite Gorge      1200  Archean        ″ Schists metamorphosed from
                                                  sedentary rocks, and intruded
                                                  igneous rocks.

    [Illustration: _Utah Parks Co. Automobile Specially Designed for
                         Southern Utah Travel_]




                               Footnotes


[1]_A table of the geological formations is on pages 45 and 46._

[2]_These accommodations are not operated by the Utah Parks Company and
    the information given is subject to change._




              Representatives of the Union Pacific System


 Aberdeen, Wash.     3-4 Union Pass’r Sta., K           F. E. STUDEBAKER, Dist.
                     and River Streets              Freight and Passenger Agent
 Astoria, Ore.       Union Pacific System Wharf         G. W. ROBERTS, District
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Atlanta, Ga.        1232 Healey Building            W. C. ELGIN, General Agent
 Bend, Ore.                                            E. H. McALLEN, Traveling
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Birmingham, Ala.    742 Brown-Marx Building,      J. H. DOUGHTY, General Agent
                     First Avenue and Twentieth
                     Street
 Boise, Idaho        823 Idaho Street             JOEL L. PRIEST, General Agent
 Boston, Mass.       207-8 Old South Building,    WILLARD MASSEY, General Agent
                     204 Washington Street
 Butte, Mont.        229 Rialto Building, 4         HENRY COULAM, General Agent
                     South Main Street
 Cheyenne, Wyo.      Union Pacific Station        O. B. STAPLETON, Ticket Agent
 Chicago, Ill.       1421 Garland Building, 58     G. R. LEMMER, General Agent,
                     E. Washington Street                     Pass’r Department
 Cincinnati, Ohio    704 Union Central Building,    W. H. CONNOR, General Agent
                     Fourth and Vine Streets
                                                       J. STANLEY ORR, District
                                                                Passenger Agent
 Cleveland, Ohio     941 Union Trust Building,      W. H. BENHAM, General Agent
                     925 Euclid Avenue
 Council Bluffs,     City Ticket Office, 37            H. B. ELLER, City Ticket
 Ia.                 Pearl Street                                         Agent
 Dallas, Texas       909 Magnolia Building,         JULIAN NANCE, General Agent
                     Commerce and Akard Streets
 Denver, Colo.       601 Seventeenth Street            W. K. CUNDIFF, Assistant
                                                        General Passenger Agent
 Des Moines, Ia.     407 Equitable Building,        D. M. SHRENK, General Agent
                     Sixth and Locust Streets
 Detroit, Mich.      508 Transportation            A. R. MALCOLM, General Agent
                     Building, 131 Lafayette
                     Boulevard, West
 Fort Collins,       Union Pacific Station           L. B. WHITEHEAD, Passenger
 Colo.                                                         and Ticket Agent
 Fresno, Calif.      207-8 Rowell Building,            T. F. BROSNAHAN, General
                     Tulare Street and Van Ness                           Agent
                     Avenue
 Glendale, Calif.    129 South Brand Boulevard              C. A. REDMOND, City
                                                                Passenger Agent
 Hollywood, Calif.   City Ticket Office,           W. L. RAMBO, City Pass’r and
                     Christie Hotel, 6732                            Tkt. Agent
                     Hollywood Blvd.
 Kansas City, Mo.    805 Walnut Street                  SETH C. RHODES, General
                                                    Agent, Passenger Department
 Leavenworth, Kan.   Union Station, Main and       A. E. MARTENY, General Agent
                     Delaware Streets
 Lewiston, Idaho     224 Breier Building                H. J. BERGER, Traveling
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Lincoln, Neb.       City Ticket Office, 204         A. D. GRANT, General Agent
                     North Eleventh Street
 Long Beach, Calif.  120 West Ocean Boulevard        R. W. SMOCK, General Agent
 Los Angeles,        221 South Broadway                 J. CRUICKSHANK, General
 Calif.                                             Agent, Passenger Department
                                                        A. T. JACKSON, District
                                                                Passenger Agent
 Milwaukee, Wis.     1205 Majestic Building, 221      E. G. CLAY, General Agent
                     Grand Avenue
 Minneapolis, Minn.  618 Metropolitan Life          E. H. HAWLEY, General Agent
                     Building, 125 South Third
                     Street
 New Orleans, La.    1001 Carondelet Building,      R. A. PETERS, General Agent
                     220 Carondelet Street
 New York, N. Y.     309-10 Stewart Building,     J. B. DePRIEST, General Agent
                     280 Broadway
                                                         I. W. CARTER, District
                                                                Passenger Agent
 Oakland, Calif.     409 Henshaw Building, 433     JAMES WARRACK, General Agent
                     Fourteenth Street
 Ocean Park, Calif.  149 Pier Avenue                      S. C. FROST, District
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Ogden, Utah         214 David Eccles Building,    W. H. CHEVERS, General Agent
                     390 Twenty-Fourth Street
 Omaha, Neb.         1523 Farnam Street            L. BEINDORFF, General Agent,
                                                           Passenger Department
 Pasadena, Calif.    395 East Colorado Street        F. H. ADAMS, General Agent
 Philadelphia, Pa.   508 Commercial Trust          F. L. FEAKINS, General Agent
                     Building, 15th and Market
                     Streets
 Pittsburgh, Pa.     216 Oliver Building,         JOHN D. CARTER, General Agent
                     Smithfield Street and Sixth
                     Avenue
                                                         EDWARD EMERY, District
                                                                Passenger Agent
 Portland, Ore.      628-37 Pittock Block,           L. E. OMER, City Passenger
                     385-1/2 Washington Street                            Agent
 Redlands, Calif.    14 Cajon Street                      W. H. PETTIBONE, City
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Reno, Nev.          200 Nevada State Life          F. D. WILSON, General Agent
                     Building. Second and Center
                     Streets
 Riverside, Calif.   Glenwood Mission Inn, 680         F. E. MIDDLETON, General
                     Main Street                                          Agent
 Sacramento, Calif.  221 California Fruit          C. T. SLAUSON, General Agent
                     Building, 1006 Fourth
                     Street
 St. Joseph, Mo.     302 Bartlett Trust            S. E. STOHR, General Freight
                     Building, Frederick Avenue     and Passenger Agent, St. J.
                     and Felix Street                           & G. I. Ry. Co.
 St. Louis, Mo.      2053 Railway Exchange          J. L. CARNEY, General Agent
                     Building, 611 Olive Street
 Salt Lake City,     City Ticket Office, Hotel            E. A. SHEWE, District
 Utah                Utah, Main and South Temple                Passenger Agent
                     Sts.
 San Diego, Calif.   Fourth and Plaza Streets       C. C. JEWETT, General Agent
 San Francisco,      City Ticket Office, 673               H. A. BUCK, District
 Calif.              Market Street                              Passenger Agent
 San Pedro, Calif.   101 West 7th Street                J. V. CARROLL, District
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Santa Ana, Calif.   305 N. Main St.                C. S. BROWNE, General Agent
 Seattle, Wash.      201 Union Station, 4th Ave.      W. H. OLIN, Ass’t General
                     and Jackson St.                Freight and Passenger Agent
                     City Ticket Office, 1405           H. A. LAWRENCE, General
                     Fourth Avenue                  Agent, Passenger Department
 Spokane, Wash.      727 Sprague Avenue                  F. H. HOCKEN, District
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Tacoma, Wash.       106 South Tenth Street            WM. CARRUTHERS. District
                                                    Freight and Passenger Agent
 Toronto, Ontario    201 Canadian Pacific           GEO. W. VAUX, General Agent
                     Building, 69 Yonge Street
 Walla Walla, Wash.  Baker Building, Main and           W. J. LEONARD, District
                     Second Streets                 Freight and Passenger Agent
 Whittier, Calif.    Union Pacific System           G. B. KENNARD, City Freight
                     Passenger Station                      and Passenger Agent
 Yakima, Wash.       Union Pacific Bldg., 104      H. M. WEST, District Freight
                     West Yakima Avenue                     and Passenger Agent

                          DEPARTMENT OF TOURS
                 (C. & N. W. Ry.--Union Pacific System)
                         C. J. COLLINS, Manager
                    148 S. Clark St., Chicago, Ill.

                              W. H. MURRAY
                        General Passenger Agent
                              OMAHA, NEB.

                             D. S. SPENCER
                        General Passenger Agent
                          SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

                              WM. McMURRAY
                        General Passenger Agent
                             PORTLAND, ORE.

                               T. C. PECK
                        General Passenger Agent
                          LOS ANGELES, CALIF.

                              JOHN L. AMOS
                       Assistant Traffic Manager
                           Deseret News Bldg.
                          SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

                             A. S. EDMONDS
                       Assistant Traffic Manager
                             PORTLAND, ORE.

                             .............
                       Assistant Traffic Manager
                          LOS ANGELES, CALIF.

                               A. V. KIPP
                       Assistant Traffic Manager
                  415 Monadnock Bldg., 681 Market St.
                         SAN FRANCISCO, CALIF.

                             W. S. BASINGER
                       Passenger Traffic Manager
                              OMAHA, NEB.

            [Illustration: This map in a higher resolution]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Retained original copyright notice; this eBook is in the public domain
  in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected a few typos.

--In the table of geologic strata, where the printed copy had a
  vertically extended V-shape to mark stratas cut by canyons, outlined
  square U-shape with square boundaries in HTML, and included ″
  characters in the text versions.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Zion National Park, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZION NATIONAL PARK ***

***** This file should be named 47397-0.txt or 47397-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/3/9/47397/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
