The Project Gutenberg EBook of Whittaker & Co.'s List of Classical,
Educational and Technical Works, by Whittaker & Co.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Whittaker & Co.'s List of Classical, Educational and Technical Works
       July 1889

Author: Whittaker & Co.

Release Date: August 19, 2012 [EBook #40536]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITTAKER'S LIST OF WORKS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  2, White Hart Street,
  Paternoster Square, E.C.


  WHITTAKER & CO.'S LIST OF

  Classical, Educational,
  and Technical Works.




CONTENTS.


  Atlases                                            12
  Arithmetic                                         17
  Bibliotheca Classica                                4
  Cambridge Greek and Latin Texts                     8
  Cambridge Texts with Notes                          7
  English Language                                   12
  Euclid                                             18
  French                                             18
  ---- French Series                                 21
  ---- French Classics                               21
  ---- Mercantile Correspondence                     28
  ---- Modern French Authors                         22
  German                                             22
  ---- German Classics                               24
  ---- Mercantile Correspondence                     28
  ---- Modern German Authors                         24
  Grammar School Classics                             5
  Greek                                              10
  Greek Classics                                    4-9
  Italian                                            26
  Latin                                              11
  ---- Classics                                     4-9
  Lower Form Series                                   6
  Mercantile Correspondence                          28
  Miniature Reference Library                        34
  Minor Arts and Industries                           3
  Miscellaneous Educational Books                    14
  Pinnock's Catechisms                               15
  Russian                                            27
  Science                                            30
  Shakespeare                                        13
  Spanish                                            27
  Specialist's Series                                28
  Students' Editions of the Gospels and the Acts     11
  Technical School and College Building              32
  Technological Dictionaries                         31
  Whittaker's Library of Arts, etc.                  30

_July, 1889._




Mr. Leland's Educational Publications.

_Third Edition, Crown 8vo, Cloth, 6s._

PRACTICAL EDUCATION.

A WORK ON PREPARING THE MEMORY, DEVELOPING QUICKNESS OF PERCEPTION, AND
TRAINING THE CONSTRUCTIVE FACULTIES.

By CHARLES G. LELAND.

_Author of "The Minor Arts," "Twelve Manuals of Art Work," "The Album of
Repoussé Work," "Industrial Art in Education, or Circular No. 4, 1882,"
"Hints on Self-Education," etc._

Mr. Leland was the first person to introduce _Industrial Art_ as a branch
of education in the public schools of America. The Bureau of Education at
Washington, observing the success of his work, employed him in 1862 to
write a pamphlet showing how hand-work could be taken or taught in schools
and families. It is usual to issue only 15,000 of these pamphlets, but so
great was the demand for this that in two years after its issue more than
60,000 were given to applicants. This work will be found greatly enlarged
in "Practical Education." Owing to it thousands of schools, classes, or
clubs of industrial art were established in England, America and Austria.
As at present a great demand exists for information as to organizing
Technical Education, this forms the first part of the work. In it the
author indicates that all the confusion and difference of opinion which at
present prevails as to this subject, may very easily be obviated by simply
beginning by teaching the youngest the easiest arts of which they are
capable, and by thence gradually leading them on to more advanced work.

"The basis of Mr. Leland's theory," says a reviewer, "is that before
learning, children should acquire the art of learning. It is not enough to
fill the memory, memory must first be created. By training children to
merely memorize, extraordinary power in this respect is to be attained in
a few months. With this is associated exercises in quickness of
perception, which are at first purely mechanical, and range from merely
training the eye to mental arithmetic, and problems in all branches of
education. Memory and quickness of perception blend in the development of
the constructive faculties or hand-work. Attention or interest is the
final factor in this system."

"_Mr. Leland's book will have a wide circulation. It deals with the whole
subject in such a downright practical fashion, and is so much the result
of long personal experience and observation, as to render it a veritable
mine of valuable suggestions._"--BRITISH ARCHITECT.

"_It has little of the dryness usually associated with such books; and no
teacher can read its thoughtful pages without imbibing many valuable
ideas._"--SCOTTISH EDUCATIONAL NEWS.

"_Strongly to be recommended._"--CHEMICAL NEWS.

"_This valuable little work._"--LIVERPOOL DAILY POST.

"_Many of Mr. Leland's suggestions might be carried out advantageously
among the young folks in our large towns and villages._"--NORTHERN WHIG.




Minor Arts and Industries.

A SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED AND PRACTICAL MANUALS FOR SCHOOL USE AND
SELF-INSTRUCTION.

EDITED BY CHARLES G. LELAND.

This series of manuals on "The Minor Arts and Industries" is designed on
the lines laid down in Mr. Leland's treatise on education. Each handbook
will present the subject with which it deals in a thoroughly popular and
practical manner; the lessons carry the student on his road step by step
from the veriest elements to the point where the most advanced works fitly
find their place in his course of study; in short, the greatest pains are
taken to ensure a thorough mastery of the rudiments of each subject, and
to so clearly state each lesson, illustrating it where necessary by plans
and drawings, that even very young children may be interested in and
trained to practical work. On similar grounds the self-taught student will
find these manuals an invaluable aid to his studies.

_Part 1 now ready. Paper cover, 1s. or in cloth, 1s. 6d._

DRAWING AND DESIGNING: IN A SERIES OF LESSONS, WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS,

BY CHARLES G. LELAND, M.A., F.R.L.S.

Other volumes will follow at intervals, amongst the subjects of which may
be named--

  WOOD CARVING.
  MODELLING.
  LEATHER WORK.
  METAL WORK.
  CARPENTERING.
  COMMERCE, ETC.




GREEK AND LATIN.


Bibliotheca Classica.

_A Series of Greek and Latin Authors, with English Notes, edited by
eminent Scholars. 8vo._

ÆSCHYLUS. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 8_s._

CICERO'S ORATIONS. By G. Long, M.A. 4 vols. 8_s._ each.

DEMOSTHENES. By R. Whiston, M.A. 2 vols. 8_s._ each.

EURIPIDES. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 3 vols. 8_s._ each.

HERODOTUS. By Rev. J. W. Blakesley, B.D. 2 vols. 12_s._

HESIOD. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 5_s._

HOMER. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Vol. I. 8_s._ Vol. II. 6_s._

HORACE. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 8_s._

JUVENAL AND PERSIUS. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 6_s._

LUCAN. The Pharsalia. By C. E. Haskins, M.A., and W. E. Heitland, M.A.
14_s._

PLATO. By W. H. Thompson, D.D. 2 vols. 5_s._ each.

SOPHOCLES. Vol. I. By Rev. F. H. Blaydes, M.A. 8_s._

---- Vol. II. Philoctetes--Electra--Ajax and Trachiniæ. By F. A. Paley,
M.A. 6_s._

TACITUS: The Annals. By the Rev. P. Frost. 8_s._

TERENCE. By E. St. J. Parry, M.A. 9_s._

VIRGIL. By J. Conington, M.A. 3 vols. 10_s._ 6_d._ each.

    In some cases the volumes cannot be sold separately. The few copies
    that remain are reserved for complete sets, which may be obtained, at
    present, for 9_l._


Grammar School Classics.

_A Series of Greek and Latin Authors, with English Notes. Fcap. 8vo._

CÆSAR: DE BELLO GALLICO. By George Long, M.A. 4_s._

---- Books I.-III. For Junior Classes. By George Long, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Books IV. and V. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Books VI. and VII. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

CATULLUS, TIBULLUS, AND PROPERTIUS. Selected Poems. With Life. By Rev. A.
H. Wratislaw. 2_s._ 6_d._

CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, and SELECT EPISTLES. By George Long,
M.A. 3_s._

CORNELIUS NEPOS. By Rev. J. F. Macmichael. 2_s._

HOMER: ILIAD. Books I.-XII. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

    Books I.-VI., 2_s._ 6_d._; Books VII.-XII., 2_s._ 6_d._

HORACE. With Life. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._ In 2 Parts: Odes,
2_s._; Satires and Epistles, 2_s._

JUVENAL: SIXTEEN SATIRES. By H. Prior, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

MARTIAL: SELECT EPIGRAMS. With Life. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

OVID: The FASTI. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

---- Books I. and II. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Books III. and IV. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Books V. and VI. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

SALLUST: CATILINA and JUGURTHA. With Life. By G. Long, M.A., and J. G.
Frazer. 3_s._ 6_d._ Catilina, 2_s._ Jugurtha, 2_s._

TACITUS: GERMANIA and AGRICOLA. By Rev. P. Frost. 2_s._ 6_d._

VIRGIL: BUCOLICS, GEORGICS, and ÆNEID, Books I.-IV. Abridged from
Professor Conington's edition. 4_s._ 6_d._

---- ÆNEID, Books V.-XII. 4_s._ 6_d._

    _Also in 9 separate volumes, 1s. 6d. each._

XENOPHON: The ANABASIS. With Life. By Rev. J. F. Macmichael. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _Also in 4 separate volumes, 1s. 6d. each._

---- The CYROPÆDIA. By G. M. Gorham, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

---- Books I. and II. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Books V. and VI. in 1 vol. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- MEMORABILIA. By Percival Frost, M.A. 3_s._

A GRAMMAR-SCHOOL ATLAS OF CLASSICAL GEOGRAPHY, containing Ten selected
Maps. Imperial 8vo. 3_s._

_Uniform with the Series._

THE NEW TESTAMENT, in Greek. With English Notes, &c. By Rev. J. F.
Macmichael. 4_s._ 6_d._ Separate parts, St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke,
St. John, Acts, 6_d._ each, sewed.


Lower Form Series.

_With Notes and Vocabularies._

ECLOGÆ LATINÆ; OR, FIRST LATIN READING-BOOK, WITH ENGLISH NOTES AND A
DICTIONARY. By the late Rev. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 1_s._
6_d._

LATIN VOCABULARIES FOR REPETITION. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. 2nd Edition,
revised. Fcap. 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

EASY LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A.
Fcap. 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

VIRGIL'S ÆNEID. Book I. Abridged from Conington's Edition by Rev. J. G.
Sheppard, D.C.L. With Vocabulary by W. F. R. Shilleto. 1_s._ 6_d._ [_Now
ready._

CÆSAR: DE BELLO GALLICO. Book I. With Notes by George Long, M.A., and
Vocabulary by W. F. R. Shilleto. 1_s._ 6_d._ [Book II. _in the press_.

TALES FOR LATIN PROSE COMPOSITION. With Notes and Vocabulary. By G. H.
Wells, M.A. 2_s._

MATERIALS FOR LATIN PROSE COMPOSITION. By the late Rev. P. Frost, M.A. New
Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s._ Key (for Tutors only), 4_s._

A LATIN VERSE-BOOK. AN INTRODUCTORY WORK ON HEXAMETERS AND PENTAMETERS. By
the late Rev. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s._ Key (for Tutors
only), 5_s._

ANALECTA GRÆCA MINORA, with INTRODUCTORY SENTENCES, ENGLISH NOTES, AND A
DICTIONARY. By the late Rev. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s._

GREEK TESTAMENT SELECTIONS. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. 2nd Edition,
enlarged, with Notes and Vocabulary. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._


Cambridge Texts with Notes.

_A Selection of the most usually read of the Greek and Latin Authors,
Annotated for Schools. Fcap. 8vo, 1s. 6d. each, with exceptions._

EURIPIDES. ALCESTIS--MEDEA--HIPPOLYTUS--HECUBA--BACCHÆ--ION
(2_s._)--ORESTES--PHOENISSÆ--TROADES--HERCULES FURENS--ANDROMACHE--
IPHIGENIA IN TAURIS--SUPPLICES. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D.

ÆSCHYLUS. PROMETHEUS VINCTUS--SEPTEM CONTRA
THEBAS--AGAMEMNON--PERSÆ--EUMENIDES--CHOEPHOROE. By F. A. Paley, M.A.,
LL.D.

SOPHOCLES. OEDIPUS TYRANNUS--OEDIPUS COLONEUS--ANTIGONE--ELECTRA--AJAX. By
F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D.

THUCYDIDES. BOOK IV. By. F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D.

XENOPHON. HELLENICA. BOOK II. By Rev. L. D. Dowdall, M.A.

---- ANABASIS. Edited by Rev. J. F. Macmichael. _New edition_, revised by
J. E. Melhuish, M.A. In 6 vols. Book I. (with Life, Introduction,
Itinerary, &c.); Books II. and III. 2_s._; Book IV., Book V., Book VI.,
Book VII.

HOMER. ILIAD. BOOK I. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 1_s._

VIRGIL (abridged from Conington's edition). BUCOLICS: GEORGICS, 2 parts:
ÆNEID, 9 parts.

TERENCE. ANDRIA--HAUTON TIMORUMENOS--PHORMIO--ADELPHOE. By Professor
Wagner, Ph.D.

CICERO. DE SENECTUTE--DE AMICITIA--EPISTOLÆ SELECTÆ. By G. Long, M.A.

OVID. SELECTIONS. By A. J. Macleane, M.A.

_Others in preparation._


Cambridge Greek and Latin Texts.

These Texts, which are clearly printed at the Cambridge University Press,
on good paper, and bound in a handy form, have been reduced in price, and
will now meet the requirements of masters who wish to use Text and Notes
separately.

ÆSCHYLUS. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 2_s._

CÆSAR: DE BELLO GALLICO. By G. Long, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

CICERO: DE SENECTUTE et DE AMICITIA, et EPISTOLÆ SELECTÆ. By G. Long, M.A.
1_s._ 6_d._

CICERONIS ORATIONES. Vol. I. (in Verrem.) By G. Long, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

EURIPIDES. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 3 vols., each 2_s._

---- Vol. I.
Rhesus--Medea--Hippolytus--Alcestis--Heraclidæ--Supplices--Troades--Index.

---- Vol. II. Ion--Helena--Andromache--Electra--Bacchæ--Hecuba--Index.

---- Vol. III. Hercules Furens--Phoenissæ--Orestes--Iphigenia in
Tauris--Iphigenia in Aulide--Cyclops--Index.

HERODOTUS. By J. G. Blakesley, B.D. 2 vols., each 2_s._ 6_d._

HOMERI ILIAS. I.-XII. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

HORATIUS. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

JUVENAL ET PERSIUS. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

LUCRETIUS. By H. A. J. Munro, M.A. 2_s._

SALLUSTI CRISPI CATILINA ET JUGURTHA. By G. Long, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

SOPHOCLES. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

TERENTI COMOEDIÆ. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2_s._

THUCYDIDES. By J. G. Donaldson, D.D. 2 vols., each 2_s._

VERGILIUS. By J. Conington, M.A. 2_s._

XENOPHONTIS EXPEDITIO CYRI. By J. F. Macmichael, B.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRÆCE. By F. H. Scrivener, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._ An edition
with wide margin for notes, half bound, 12_s._


Annotated Editions.

CICERO'S MINOR WORKS. De Officiis, &c. &c. With English Notes, by W. C.
Tylor, LL.D. 12mo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

VIRGIL'S ÆNEID. With English Notes, by C. Anthon, LL.D. Adapted for use in
English Schools by the Rev. F. Metcalfe, M.A. _New Edition._ 12mo. 7_s._
6_d._


Greek Class Books.

BEATSON'S PROGRESSIVE EXERCISES ON THE COMPOSITION OF GREEK IAMBIC VERSE.
12mo. cloth, 3_s._

DAWSON'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON TO THE NEW TESTAMENT. _New Edition_, by Dr.
Tylor. 8vo. cloth, 9_s._

NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRÆCE. Textus Stephanici, 1550. Accedunt variæ Lectiones
editionum Bezæ, Elzeviri, Lachmanni, Tischendorfii, Tregellesii, curante
F. H. Scrivener, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._ An Edition with wide margin for MS.
Notes, 4to. half-bound morocco, 12_s._

---- Textûs Stephanici, A.D. 1550, Cum variis Lectionibus Editionum Bezæ,
Elzeviri, Lachmanni, Tischendorfii, Tregellesii, Westcott-Hortii,
Versionis Anglicanæ Emendatorum, Curante F. H. A. Scrivener, A.M., D.C.L.,
LL.D., Accedunt Parallela S. Scripturæ Loca. Small post 8vo. cloth, pp.
xvi.-598, 7_s._ 6_d._

    EDITIO MAJOR _containing, in addition to the matter in the other
    Edition, the Capitula (majora et minora) and the Eusebian Canons, the
    various Readings of Westcott and Hort, and those adopted by the
    Revisers; also a revised and much-enlarged series of References._

---- VALPY'S. For the use of Schools. 12mo. cloth, 5_s._

---- Edited by Rev. Macmichael. _See Grammar School Classics._


Students' Editions of the Gospels and the Acts.

_Crown 8vo. cloth._

THE GOSPEL OF S. MATTHEW. The Greek Text, with Critical, Grammatical, and
Explanatory Notes, &c., by the late Rev. W. Trollope, M.A., re-edited by
the Rev. W. H. Rowlandson, M.A. 5_s._

GOSPEL OF S. MARK. The Greek Text, with Critical, Grammatical, and
Explanatory Notes, Prolegomena, &c., by Rev. W. H. Rowlandson, M.A. 4_s._
6_d._

GOSPEL OF S. LUKE. The Greek Text, with Critical, Grammatical, and
Explanatory Notes, &c., by the late Rev. W. Trollope, M.A., revised and
re-edited by the Rev. W. H. Rowlandson, M.A. 5_s._

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. The Greek Text, with Critical, Grammatical, and
Explanatory Notes, and Examination Questions, by Rev. W. Trollope, M.A.,
re-edited and revised by the Rev. G. F. Browne, M.A. 5_s._


Latin Class Books.

BEDFORD'S PROPRIA QUÆ MARIBUS; or, Short Rules for the Genders of Latin
Nouns, and a Latin Prosody. 12mo. 1_s._

BOSSUT'S LATIN WORD BOOK; or, First Step to the Latin Language. 18mo.
1_s._

---- LATIN PHRASE BOOK. 18mo. 1_s._

FLORILEGIUM POETICUM. A Selection of Elegiac Extracts from Ovid and
Tibullus. _New edition_, greatly enlarged with English Notes. By the late
Rev. P. Frost, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s._

GRADUS AD PARNASSUM; sive novus sinonymorum, epithetorum, versuum, ac
phrasium poeticarum, thesaurus. _New edition._ By G. Pyper. 12mo. cloth,
7_s._

---- BY VALPY. Whittaker's Improved edition. Latin and English. _New
edition._ Royal 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

STODDART'S NEW DELECTUS; or, Easy Steps to Latin Construing. For the use
of Pupils commencing the Language. Adapted to the best Latin Grammars,
with a Dictionary attached. _New edition._ 12mo. 4_s._

PENROSE'S (REV. JOHN) Easy Exercises in Latin Elegiac Verse. _New
edition._ 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

---- Key to ditto, for Tutors only, 3_s._ 6_d._


Atlases.

LONG'S ATLAS OF CLASSICAL GEOGRAPHY. Containing Twenty-four Maps.
Constructed by William Hughes, F.R.G.S., and Edited by George Long, M.A.
_New edition_, with Coloured Outlines, and an Index of Places. Royal 8vo.
6_s._

LONG'S GRAMMAR SCHOOL ATLAS OF CLASSICAL GEOGRAPHY. Containing Ten Maps,
selected from the larger Atlas. Constructed by W. Hughes, F.R.G.S., and
edited by George Long, M.A. _New edition_, with Coloured Outlines. Royal
8vo. 3_s._


English Language and Miscellaneous.

ALLEN AND CORNWELL'S SCHOOL GRAMMAR. Cloth, 1_s._ 9_d._

---- GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS. Cloth, 1_s._

BELL'S MODERN READER AND SPEAKER. A Selection of Poetry and Prose, from
the Writings of Eminent Authors. 12mo. 3_s._ 6_d._

DUNCAN'S ENGLISH EXPOSITOR; or, Explanatory Spelling-book. Containing an
Alphabetical Collection of all the most useful, proper, and elegant words
in the English language, divided into Syllables, and properly accented.
_New edition._ 12mo. 1_s._ 6_d._

LATHAM'S (R. G.) DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. Abridged and
condensed into one volume. 8vo. cloth, 14_s._

MACKAY (C.) A DICTIONARY OF LOWLAND SCOTCH. By Charles Mackay, LL.D. With
an Introductory Chapter on the Poetry, Humour, and Literary History of the
Scottish Language, and an Appendix of Scottish Proverbs. Large post 8vo.
cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._ half bound, 8_s._ 6_d._

---- SELECTED POEMS AND SONGS OF CHARLES MACKAY, LL.D. With a Commendatory
and Critical Introduction by Eminent Writers. Wide foolscap 8vo. half
cloth boards, 1_s._ 6_d._ Sewed, 1_s._

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. Including Scientific,
Technical, and Biblical Words and Terms. _New edition_, with Supplement of
over 4,600 New Words and Meanings. 4to. cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._; half-calf,
1_l._ 10_s._ With Appendices, £1 11_s._ 6_d._; half-calf, 2_l._

       *       *       *       *       *

SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS, with Text and Introduction in English and German.
Edited by C. Sachs, Prof. Ph. D. 8vo. cloth, each Play or Number, 10_d._

_Now Ready_:

   1. Julius Cæsar.
   2. Romeo and Juliet.
   3. King Henry VIII.
   4. King Lear.
   5. Othello.
   6. Hamlet.
   7. A Midsummer Night's Dream.
   8. Macbeth.
   9. King John.
  10. King Richard II.
  11. King Henry IV. I.
  12.   "    "      II.
  13. King Henry V.
  14. King Richard III.
  15. Cymbeline.
  16. Coriolanus.
  17. Antony and Cleopatra.
  18. Merchant of Venice.
  19. Much Ado about Nothing.

_Others to follow._

    "This edition will be quite a godsend to grown-up students of either
    language, for the ordinary class reading books are too childish to
    arrest their attention. The parallel paging saves the labour of using
    a dictionary, and the series is so low in price as to place it within
    the reach of all."--_Saturday Review._

SHAKESPEARE REPRINTS. 1. King Lear. Parallel Texts of Quarto 1 and Folio
1. Edited by Dr. W. Vietor, of Marburg. Square 16mo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

    _The texts of the first quarto and folio, with collations from the
    later quartos and folios, are here printed in a compact and convenient
    volume, intended as a class-book in the University._


Miscellaneous Educational Books.

SEIDEL (ROBT.) INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION: A Pedagogic and Social Necessity.
Crown 8vo. 4_s._

WOODWARD (C. M.) THE MANUAL TRAINING SCHOOL, ITS AIMS, METHODS, AND
RESULTS. With Figured Drawings of Shop Exercises in Woods and Metals. 8vo.
10_s._

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF EDUCATION. Hints toward a Select and Descriptive
Bibliography of Education. Arranged by Topics, and Indexed by Authors. By
G. Stanley Hall, Professor, John Hopkins University, and John M.
Mansfield. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi.-309, 7_s._ 6_d._

CHEPMELL'S (REV. DR.) SHORT COURSE OF GRECIAN, ROMAN, AND ENGLISH HISTORY.
_New edition._ 12mo. 5_s._ Questions on, 12mo. 1_s._

COLTON (B. P.) ELEMENTARY COURSE OF PRACTICAL ZOOLOGY. By B. P. Colton,
A.M., Instructor in Biology, Ottawa High School. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp.
xiv.-182, 4_s._ 6_d._

CORNWELL'S SCHOOL GEOGRAPHY. 3_s._ 6_d._ With Thirty Maps on Steel, 5_s._
6_d._

---- GEOGRAPHY FOR BEGINNERS. 1_s._ With Questions, 1_s._ 4_d._

DURHAM UNIVERSITY CALENDAR, with Almanack. Cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._ [_Published
annually._

JOYCE (P. W.) A HANDBOOK OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT AND METHODS OF TEACHING. By
P. W. Joyce, LL.D., &c. _11th edition, revised._ Cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

NATURE READERS. Seaside and Wayside. No. 1. By Julia McNair Wright. Cloth,
1_s._ 6_d._

    The first of a Series of Primary Readers for young children. It treats
    of crabs, wasps, spiders, bees, and some univalve molluscs.

PINNOCK'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. From the Invasion of Julius Cæsar. With a
Biographical and Historical Dictionary. Questions for Examination,
Genealogical Tables, Progress of Literature and the Constitution, &c.
Illustrated. Continued by the Rev. W. H. Pinnock, LL.D. _New edition._
12mo. 6_s._

---- HISTORY OF GREECE. With an Introduction on the Natural and Political
Geography of Greece, Dictionary of Difficult Terms, Questions for
Examination, Genealogical Tables, &c. Illustrated. By Dr. W. C. Taylor.
_New edition._ 12mo. 5_s._ 6_d._

---- HISTORY OF ROME. With an Introduction, the Geography of the Roman
Empire, Notices of the Roman Manners, and Illustrations, Questions for
Examination, Chronological Index, &c. Illustrated. By Dr. W. C. Taylor.
_New edition._ 12mo. 5_s._ 6_d._

PINNOCK'S CATECHISMS OF THE ARTS, SCIENCES, AND LITERATURE. Whittaker's
Improved Editions. Illustrated with Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts, carefully
re-edited. 18mo. price 9_d._ each.

    HISTORY.--Modern--Ancient--Universal--Bible and Gospel--Scripture--
    Chronology--England--Scotland--France--America--Rome--Greece--Jews.

    GEOGRAPHY.--Ancient--Modern, Improved Edition--Modern, Original
    Edition--Sacred--England and Wales--Use of the Globes.

    GRAMMAR.--English--French--German--Italian--Latin--Spanish--Greek:
    Part I. Accidence. Part II. Syntax and Prosody--Hebrew.

    MATHEMATICS, &c.--Algebra (two
    Parts)--Arithmetic--Geometry--Navigation--Land Surveying.

    RELIGION.--Religion--Natural Theology--Scripture History--Bible and
    Gospel History.

    FINE ARTS, &c.--Architecture--Drawing--Perspective--Music--Singing.

    LITERATURE.--Mythology--Rhetoric--Logic--British Biography--Classical
    Biography.

    MISCELLANEOUS.--First Catechism--General Knowledge--Intellectual
    Philosophy--Agriculture--English Law--Heraldry--Medicine--Moral and
    Social Duties--Trade and Commerce.

SCHLEYER'S GRAMMAR, with Vocabularies of Volapuk (the Language of the
World), for all Speakers of the English Language. Second (greatly Revised)
Edition. By W. A. Seret, Certificated Teacher of the Universal Language.
Crown 8vo. pp. 420, sewed, 5_s._ 6_d._; cloth, 6_s._ 6_d._

SHUMWAY (E. S.) A DAY IN ANCIENT ROME. With numerous Illustrations. By
Edgar S. Shumway, Professor, Rutger's College, New Brunswick. Small 4to.
cloth, 5_s._

WATTON'S ORIGINAL AIDS TO EDUCATION.

Hand-series of Tablets, in Stiff Covers, 3_d._ each.

  Leading Events of General History.
  Chief Events of Old Testament History.
  Chief Events of New Testament History.
  Prophecies and other Scripture Subjects.
  Chief Events of Grecian History.
  Chief Events of Roman History.
  Chief Events of Eastern Empire.
  Chief Events of German History.
  Chief Events of English History.
  Chief English Battles and Results.
  Chief Events of Scottish History.
  Chief Events of French History.
  Chief Events of Prussian History.
  Chief Events of Russian History.
  Eminent Men of Modern Times.
  Chief Events of Church History.
  Natural System of Botany.
  The Linnæan System of Botany.
  Natural History--Zoology.
  Natural Philosophy.
  Principles of Grammatical Analysis, with Examples.
  Guide to English Parsing, with Examples.
  Abstract of Heathen Mythology.
  Word Formation--Saxon, Latin, and Greek Prefixes, with Examples.
  Chief Grecian and Roman Battles and Results.

LARGE TYPE SERIES OF TABLETS

(20 by 23 inches), embracing Historical, Geographical, and other Subjects,
4_d._ each, for suspension.

WATTON'S SKELETON EXERCISE BOOKS.

For History, Geography, Biography, Analysis, Parsing, and Chronology,
with Script Headings and Specimen Page. Price regulated by the thickness
of the books, 1_s._ and 2_s._ each. Also now ready, a filled Biographical
Exercise Book, 2 Series, each 1_s._ Charts systematically arranged with
date words, 60 pages, cloth, 1_s._ Selected Descriptive Poetry, 1_s._
Object Lessons, Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, 32 pp., in stiff covers, 2_d._ each.


School and University Analyses.

By the Rev. Dr. Pinnock.

AN ANALYSIS OF SCRIPTURE HISTORY; Intended for Readers of Old Testament
History, and the University Examinations; with Maps, Copious Index, and
Examination Questions. 18mo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

AN ANALYSIS OF NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY; Embracing the Criticism and
Interpretation of the original Text; with Questions for Examination. 18mo.
cloth, 4_s._

AN ANALYSIS OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY; From the Birth of Christ, to the
Council of Nice, A.D. 325. With Examination Questions. 18mo. cloth, 3_s._
6_d._

ANALYSIS OF ENGLISH CHURCH HISTORY; comprising the Reformation period, and
subsequent events; with Questions of Examination, especially intended for
the Universities and Divinity Students in general. 18mo. cloth, 4_s._
6_d._

A SHORT ANALYSIS OF OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY. With Questions for Schools.
18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

A SHORT ANALYSIS OF NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY. With Questions for Schools.
18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


Arithmetic and Euclid.

PINNOCK'S ARITHMETICAL TABLES OF MONEY, WEIGHTS, AND MEASURES. With
Questions for Examination, and Explanatory Notes, &c. 18mo. 3_d._

---- FIRST CIPHERING BOOK. Containing Easy Exercises in the First Rules of
Arithmetic. 4to. sewed, 1_s._

RYAN'S CIVIL SERVICE ARITHMETICAL EXAMINATION PAPERS. By L. J. Ryan.
Cloth, 2_s._

---- Key to Ditto. 1_s._ 6_d._

SONNENSCHEIN AND NESBITT'S ARITHMETIC. The Science and Art of Arithmetic
for the use of Schools. Post 8vo. 5_s._ 6_d._ Or separately, Part
I.--Integral. 2_s._ 6_d._ Parts II. and III.--Fractional and Approximate
Calculations. 3_s._ 6_d._ Answers to the Exercises, 1_s._ 6_d._ Exercises
separately. Part I. 1_s._ Parts II. and III. 1_s._ 3_d._

---- A B C OF ARITHMETIC. Teacher's Book, Nos. 1 and 2, each 1_s._
Exercise Book, Nos. 1 and 2, each 4_d._

WALKINGAME'S TUTOR ASSISTANT (FRASER'S). Being a Compendium of Arithmetic
and a Complete Question Book. 12mo. 2_s._ Key, 3_s._

EUCLID, THE FIRST BOOK OF. With an Introduction and Collection of Problems
for the use of Schools. By J. M. Wilson, M.A. _2nd edition._ 4to. 2_s._

EUCLID, THE FIRST SIX BOOKS, together with the ELEVENTH and TWELFTH. From
the Text of Dr. Simson. _New edition_, revised and corrected by S.
Maynard. 18mo. 4_s._




MODERN LANGUAGES.


French.

BARRÈRE (A.) PROFESSOR, R.M.A. Woolwich.

---- RÉCITS MILITAIRES. Selections from modern French authors, with short
biographical introductions in French, and English notes for the use of
army students and others. Crown 8vo. 3_s._

---- PRÉCIS OF COMPARATIVE FRENCH GRAMMAR AND IDIOMS, and Guide to
Examinations. Cloth. _Second edition, revised_, 3_s._ 6_d._

---- JUNIOR GRADUATED FRENCH COURSE affording materials for Translation,
Grammar, and Conversation. Being an introduction to the Graduated French
Course. Cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

---- ELEMENTS OF FRENCH GRAMMAR AND FIRST STEPS IN IDIOMS. With numerous
Exercises and a Vocabulary, being an Introduction to the Précis of
Comparative French Grammar. Crown 8vo. cloth, 2_s._

BELLENGER'S MODERN FRENCH CONVERSATION. Containing Elementary Phrases and
New Easy Dialogues, in French and English, on the most familiar subjects.
12mo. 2_s._ 6_d._

BOSSUT'S FRENCH WORD BOOK. 18mo. 1_s._

---- FRENCH PHRASE BOOK. 18mo. 1_s._

BOWER. PUBLIC EXAMINATION FRENCH READER. With a Vocabulary to every
extract, suitable for all Students who are preparing for a French
Examination. By A. M. Bower, F.R.G.S., late Master in University College
School, &c. Cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "The book is a very practical and useful one, and it must prove very
    handy for students who are preparing for a French examination, the
    persons for whose special aid it has been specially provided. It would
    also serve admirably for use in schools as a class
    book."--_Schoolmaster._

DELILLE'S FRENCH GRAMMAR. In Two Parts. I.--Accidence. II.--Syntax,
written in French, with Exercises conducive to the speaking of the French
Language, &c. 12mo. 5_s._ 6_d._ Key, 3_s._

---- EASY FRENCH POETRY FOR BEGINNERS; or, Short Selections in Verse on a
Graduated Plan for the Memory. With English Notes. 12mo. 2_s._

DELILLE'S MODÈLES DE POÉSIE FRANÇAIS. With Treatise on French
Versification. _New edition._ 12mo. 6_s._

---- RÉPERTOIRE DES PROSATEURS FRANÇAIS. With Biographical Sketches, &c.
_New edition._ 12mo. 6_s._ 6_d._

---- MANUEL ÉTYMOLOGIQUE; or, an Interpretative Index of the most
recurrent Words in the French Language. 12mo. 2_s._ 6_d._

---- BEGINNER'S OWN FRENCH BOOK. Being a Practical and Easy Method of
Learning the Elements of the French Language. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._ Key,
2_s._

DES CARRIÈRES' FRENCH IDIOMATICAL PHRASES AND FAMILIAR DIALOGUES. Square,
3_s._ 6_d._

DES CARRIÈRES' HISTOIRE DE FRANCE, DEPUIS L'ETABLISSEMENT DE LA MONARCHIE.
Continuée jusqu'au rétablissement de l'Empire sous Napoleon III., par C.
J. Delille. 12mo. 7_s._

DUVERGER'S COMPARISON BETWEEN THE IDIOMS, GENIUS, AND PHRASEOLOGY OF THE
FRENCH AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES. _New edition._ 12mo. 4_s._ 6_d._

GASC (F. E. A.) AN IMPROVED MODERN POCKET DICTIONARY OF THE FRENCH AND
ENGLISH LANGUAGES. _New edition._ 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ Also in 2 vols.
in neat leatherette, 5_s._

---- MODERN FRENCH-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-FRENCH DICTIONARY. _New edition,
revised._ In 1 vol. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

HAMEL'S NEW UNIVERSAL FRENCH GRAMMAR. _New Edition._ 12mo. 4_s._

---- GRAMMATICAL EXERCISES UPON THE FRENCH LANGUAGE. _New edition._ 12mo.
4_s._ Key, 3_s._

---- FRENCH GRAMMAR AND EXERCISES. _New edition._ 12mo. 5_s._ 6_d._ Key,
4_s._

LEVIZAC'S DICTIONARY OF THE FRENCH AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES. _New edition_,
by N. Lambert. 12mo. 6_s._ 6_d._

NUGENT'S POCKET DICTIONARY OF THE FRENCH AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES. _New
edition_, revised by J. C. J. Tarver. _Pearl edition_, 4_s._ 6_d._

OLLENDORFF'S (Dr. H. G.) NEW METHOD OF LEARNING TO READ, WRITE, AND SPEAK
A LANGUAGE IN SIX MONTHS. Adapted to the French. _New edition._ 12mo.
6_s._ 6_d._ Key, 8vo. 7_s._

PRACTICAL COMMERCIAL CORRESPONDENCE. _See Miscellaneous._


Whittaker's French Series.

For the use of Schools and Private Students. Edited by A. Barrère, Prof.
R.M.A. Woolwich, &c., and others. Each number with a literary Introduction
and Arguments in English, foot-notes explaining the more difficult
passages, and translations of the idiomatic expressions into the
corresponding English idioms.

Fcap. 8vo, each number, sewed, 6_d._; cloth, 9_d._

_Now Ready_:--

1. SCRIBE. LE VERRE D'EAU. Barrère.

2. MOLIERE. LE BOURGEOIS GENTILHOMME. Gasc.

3. MOLIERE. L'AVARE. Gasc.

4. SOUVESTRE. SOUS LA TONNELLE. Desages.

5. MOLIERE. LE MISANTHROPE. Gasc.

6. GALLAND. ALI BABA. Clare.

7. CORNEILLE. LE CID. Gasc.

8, 9. LAMARTINE. JEANNE D'ARC. Barrère.

10, 11. PIRON. LA METROMANIE. Delbos.

_Others to follow._


Whittaker's French Classics, with English Notes.

_Fcap. 8vo. cloth._

AVENTURES DE TELEMAQUE. Par Fénélon. _New edition._ Edited and revised by
C. J. Delille. 2_s._ 6_d._

HISTOIRE DE CHARLES XII. Par Voltaire. _New edition._ Edited and revised
by L. Direy. 1_s._ 6_d._

PICCIOLA. Par X. B. Saintine. _New edition._ Edited and revised by Dr.
Dubuc. 1_s._ 6_d._

SELECT FABLES OF LA FONTAINE. _New edition._ Edited by F. Gasc, M.A. 1_s._
6_d._


Whittaker's Series of Modern French Authors.

_WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES._

_For Beginners._

LA BELLE NIVERNAISE. Histoire d'un vieux bateau et de son équipage. By
Alphonse Daudet. With 6 illustrations. Edited by James Boïelle, Senior
French Master at Dulwich College. 2_s._ 6_d._ [_Ready._

_For Advanced Students._

BUG JARGAL. By Victor Hugo. Edited by James Boïelle, Senior French Master
at Dulwich College. 3_s._ [_Ready._

_Others to follow._


German.

FLÜGEL'S COMPLETE DICTIONARY OF THE GERMAN AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES.
Comprising the German and English, and English and German. Adapted to the
English Student, with great Additions and Improvements. By C. A. Feiling,
A. Heimann, and J. Oxenford. _New edition._ 2 vols. 8vo. 1_l._ 1_s._

---- ABRIDGED GERMAN AND ENGLISH, AND ENGLISH AND GERMAN DICTIONARY.
Carefully compiled from the larger Dictionary. By C. A. Feiling and J.
Oxenford. _New edition._ Royal 18mo. 6_s._

GRENFELL'S ELEMENTARY GERMAN EXERCISES. Part I. Adapted to the Rugby
School German Accidence. 12mo. 1_s._ 6_d._

OLLENDORFF'S (Dr. H. S.). NEW METHOD OF LEARNING TO READ, WRITE, AND SPEAK
A LANGUAGE IN SIX MONTHS. Adapted to the German. _New edition._ Crown 8vo.
7_s._ Key, 8vo. 7_s._

SHELDON (E. S.) A SHORT GERMAN GRAMMAR FOR HIGH SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES.
Crown 8vo. 3_s._

WHITTAKER'S COURSE OF MODERN GERMAN. By F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor, R.M.A.
Woolwich, Examiner in German to the College of Preceptors, London;
Examiner in German at the Victoria University, Manchester, and J. F.
Davis, M.A., D.Lit. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth.

A CONCISE GERMAN GRAMMAR. With especial reference to Phonology,
Comparative Philology, English and German Correspondences, and Idioms. By
Frz. Lange, Ph.D., Professor at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. In
three Parts. Part I., Elementary, 2_s._ Part II., Intermediate, 2_s._ Part
III. in the press.

ELEMENTARY GERMAN READER. A Graduated Collection of Readings in Prose and
Poetry. With English Notes and a Vocabulary. By F. Lange, Ph.D. 1_s._
6_d._

ADVANCED GERMAN READER. A Graduated Collection of Readings in Prose and
Poetry. With English Notes and a Vocabulary. By F. Lange, Ph.D. and J. F.
Davis, M.A., D.Lit. [_Nearly ready._

PROGRESSIVE GERMAN EXAMINATION COURSE. In Three Parts. By F. Lange, Ph.D.,
Prof. R.M.A., Woolwich, Examiner in German to the College of Preceptors.

    Comprising the Elements of German Grammar, an Historical Sketch of the
    Teutonic Languages, English and German Correspondences, Materials for
    Translation, Dictation, Extempore, Conversation and complete
    Vocabularies.

        1. ELEMENTARY COURSE. Cloth, 2_s._

        2. INTERMEDIATE COURSE. Cloth, 2_s._

        3. ADVANCED COURSE. Second revised edition. Cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

    "We cordially commend it as a useful help to examiners, who will find
    it well adapted to their needs."--_Practical Teacher._

_In Preparation._

GERMAN CONVERSATIONAL DICTIONARY. A Guide to Modern German Conversation.
For the Every-day Purposes of Travellers and Students. By G. May and J. F.
Davis, M.A., D.Lit.


German Classics, with English Notes.

_Fcap. 8vo. cloth._

GERMAN BALLADS. From Uhland, Goethe, and Schiller. With Introductions to
each Poem, copious Explanatory Notes, and Biographical Notices. By C.
Bielefeld. 1_s._ 6_d._

GOETHE'S HERMANN AND DOROTHEA. With Short Introduction, Argument, and
Notes Critical and Explanatory. By Ernest Bell and E. Wölfel. 1_s._ 6_d._

SCHILLER'S MAID OF ORLEANS. With Introduction and Notes. By Dr. Wagner.
1_s._ 6_d._

---- MARIA STUART. With Introduction and Notes. By V. Kastner, M.A. 1_s._
6_d._

---- WALLENSTEIN. Complete Text. _New edition._ With Notes, Arguments, and
an Historical and Critical Introduction. By C. A. Buchheim, Professor,
Ph.D., 5_s._ Or separately--Part I.--THE LAGER AND DIE PICCOLOMINI. 2_s._
6_d._ Part II.--WALLENSTEIN'S TOD. 2_s._ 6_d._


Whittaker's Series of Modern German Authors.

_With Introduction and Notes. Edited by F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor, Royal
Military Academy, Woolwich._

The attention of the heads of Colleges and Schools is respectfully
directed to this new Series of "MODERN GERMAN AUTHORS" which is intended
to supply the much-felt want of suitable Reading Books for English
Students of German who have passed through the preliminary stages of
fables and anecdotes.

To those who wish to extend their linguistic and grammatical knowledge,
these volumes will afford, in one respect, a great advantage over those of
an earlier period, presenting, as they do, the compositions of the best
living, or only recently deceased authors. The Notes, besides etymological
and other explanations, will contain many useful idiomatic expressions
suggested by the text, and worth committing to memory.

_FIRST SERIES._

FOR BEGINNERS. Edited, with a Grammatical Introduction, Notes, and a
Vocabulary, by F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor, R.M.A. Woolwich, Examiner in
German to the College of Preceptors, and H. Hager, Ph.D., Examiner in
German to the London University.

HEY'S FABELN FÜR KINDER. Illustrated by O. Speckter. Edited, with an
Introduction, Grammatical Summary, Words, and a complete Vocabulary. By F.
Lange, Ph.D., Professor. 1_s._ 6_d._

THE SAME, with a Phonetic Introduction, Phonetic Transcription of the
Text. By F. Lange, Professor, Ph.D. 2_s._

_SECOND SERIES._

FOR INTERMEDIATE STUDENTS. Edited, with a Biographical Introduction,
Notes, and a complete vocabulary, by F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor, and H.
Hager, Ph.D.

DOKTOR WESPE. Lustspiel in fünf Aufzügen von JULIUS RODERICH BENEDIX.
Edited by F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor. 2_s._ 6_d._

SCHILLER'S JUGENDJAHRE. Erzählung von FRZ. HOFFMANN. Edited by H. Hager,
Ph.D., Professor. [_In the press._

_THIRD SERIES._

FOR ADVANCED STUDENTS. Edited, with a Literary Introduction and Notes, by
F. Lange, Ph.D., Professor, R.M.A. Woolwich, in co-operation with F.
Storr, B.A.; A. A. Macdonell, M.A.; H. Hager, Ph.D.; C. Neuhaus, Ph.D. and
others.

MEISTER MARTIN, der Küfner. Erzählung von E. T. A. Hoffman. Edited by F.
Lange, Ph.D., Professor, Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 1_s._ 6_d._

HANS LANGE. Schauspiel von Paul Heyse. Edited by A. A. Macdonell, M.A.,
Ph.D., Taylorian Teacher, University, Oxford. 2_s._

AUF WACHE. Novelle von Berthold Auerbach. DER GEFRORENE KUSS. Novelle von
Otto Roquette. Edited by A. A. Macdonell, M.A. 2_s._

DER BIBLIOTHEKAR. Lustspiel von G. von Moser. Edited by F. Lange, Ph.D.
Second revised Edition. 2_s._

EINE FRAGE. Idyll von George Ebers. Edited by F. Storr, B.A., Chief Master
of Modern Subjects in Merchant Taylor's School. 2_s._

DIE JOURNALISTEN. Lustspiel von Gustav Freytag. Edited by Professor F.
Lange, Ph.D. Second revised Edition. 2_s._ 6_d._

ZOPF UND SCHWERT. Lustspiel von Karl Gutzkow. Edited by Professor F.
Lange, Ph.D. 2_s._ 6_d._

GERMAN EPIC TALES IN PROSE. I. Die Nibelungen, von A. F. C. Vilmar.--II.
Walther und Hildegund, von Albert Richter. Edited by Karl Neuhaus, Ph.D.,
the International College, Isleworth. 2_s._ 6_d._


Italian.

BARETTI'S DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. To which is
prefixed an Italian and English Grammar. _New Edition_, entirely
rewritten. By G. Comelati and J. Davenport. 2 vols. 8vo. 1_l._ 1_s._

GRAGLIA'S NEW POCKET DICTIONARY OF THE ITALIAN AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES. With
considerable Additions, and a Compendious Elementary Italian Grammar.
18mo. 4_s._ 6_d._

OLLENDORFF'S (DR. H. G.) NEW METHOD OF LEARNING TO READ, WRITE, AND SPEAK
A LANGUAGE IN SIX MONTHS. Adapted to the Italian. _New Edition._ Crown
8vo. 7_s._ Key, 8vo. 7_s._

SOAVE'S NOVELLE MORALI. _New Edition._ 12mo. 4_s._

VENERONI'S COMPLETE ITALIAN GRAMMAR. By P. Rosteri. 12mo. 6_s._

VERGANI AND PIRANESI'S ITALIAN AND ENGLISH GRAMMAR. With Exercises, &c. By
J. Guichet. _New edition_, by Signor A. Tommasi. 12mo. 5_s._ Key, 3_s._


Russian.

DOLBESHOFF (E.) A DICTIONARY OF THE RUSSIAN AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES. In two
volumes. Vol. I. Russian-English. Vol. II. English-Russian. Compiled by E.
Dolbeshoff in co-operation with C. E. Turner, Professor of English
Language and Literature at the University, St. Petersburg. [_Preparing._


Spanish.

NEUMAN AND BARETTI'S SPANISH AND ENGLISH, AND ENGLISH AND SPANISH
DICTIONARY. Revised and enlarged by M. Seoane, M.D. 2 vols. 8vo. 1_l._
8_s._

---- POCKET DICTIONARY. Spanish and English, and English and Spanish.
Compiled from the larger work. 18mo. 5_s._

OLLENDORFF'S (DR. H. G.) NEW METHOD OF LEARNING TO READ, WRITE, AND SPEAK
A LANGUAGE IN SIX MONTHS. Adapted to the Spanish. _New edition._ 8vo.
12_s._ Key, 8vo. 7_s._

PONCE DE LEON'S ENGLISH-SPANISH TECHNOLOGICAL DICTIONARY. 8vo. 1_l._
16_s._ _See page 31._


Practical Mercantile Correspondence.

A Collection of Commercial Letters and Forms, with Notes, Explanatory and
Grammatical, and a Vocabulary of Commercial Terms, edited by L. Simon,
Chr. Vogel, Ph.D., H. P. Skelton, W. C. Wrankmore, Leland Mason, and
others. Intended as Class Books for Schools and for Self-Instruction.

_Now Ready, crown 8vo, cloth:_

ENGLISH, with German Notes, 3_s._

GERMAN, with English Notes, 3_s._

ENGLISH, with French Notes, 4_s._ 6_d._

FRENCH, with English Notes, 4_s._ 6_d._

This new Collection of Model Letters and Epistolary Forms embraces the
whole sphere of Commercial Transactions. Each example is provided with
such remarks and explanations, that any one with a fair grammatical
knowledge of the particular language will find it an easy matter to
prepare a well-expressed letter.


The Specialist's Series.

_A New Series of Handbooks for Students and Practical Engineers. Crown
8vo. With many Illustrations._

GAS ENGINES. Their Theory and Management. By William Macgregor. With 7
Plates. Crown 8vo. pp. 245, 8_s._ 6_d._

BALLOONING: A Concise Sketch of its History and Principles. From the best
sources, Continental and English. By G. May. With Illustrations. Crown
8vo. pp. vi.-97, 2_s._ 6_d._

ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION OF ENERGY, and its Transformation, Subdivision, and
Distribution. A Practical Handbook by Gisbert Kapp, C.E., Associate Member
of the Institution of Civil Engineers, &c. With 119 Illustrations. Crown
8vo. pp. xi.-331. 7_s._ 6_d._

ARC AND GLOW LAMPS. A Practical Handbook on Electric Lighting. By Julius
Maier, Ph.D., Assoc. Soc. Tel. Eng., &c. With 78 Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
pp. viii.-376. 7_s._ 6_d._

ON THE CONVERSION OF HEAT INTO WORK. A Practical Handbook on Heat-Engines.
By William Anderson, M. Inst. C.E. With 64 Illustrations. Pp. viii.-254.
Cr. 8vo. 6_s._

SEWAGE TREATMENT, PURIFICATION AND UTILIZATION; A Practical Manual for the
Use of Corporations, Local Boards, Officers of Health, Inspectors of
Nuisances, Chemists, Manufacturers, Riparian Owners, Engineers and
Ratepayers. By J. W. Slater, F.E.S., Editor of "Journal of Science." Crown
8vo. cloth, price 6_s._

THE TELEPHONE. By W. H. Preece, F.R.S., and J. Maier, Ph.D. With numerous
illustrations. Cr. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

MANURES, OR THE PHILOSOPHY OF MANURING. By Dr. A. B. Griffiths, F.R.S.Ed.,
F.C.S., Principal and Lecturer on Chemistry in the School of Science,
Lincoln, &c., &c. Cr. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

HYDRAULIC MOTORS: TURBINES AND PRESSURE MOTORS. By George R. Bodmer,
Assoc. M.Inst.C.E. 14_s._

ALTERNATING CURRENTS OF ELECTRICITY. By Thomas H. Blakesley, M.A.,
M.Inst.C.E. 4_s._ 6_d._

_In preparation._

GALVANIC BATTERIES. By Professor George Forbes, M.A.

INDUCTION COILS. By Professor A. J. Fleming, M.A., D.Sc.

THE DYNAMO. By Guy C. Fricker.

_Others to follow._

       *       *       *       *       *

NIPHER (F. E.) THEORY OF MAGNETIC MEASUREMENTS, WITH AN APPENDIX ON THE
METHOD OF LEAST SQUARES. One volume. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5_s._

PLANTÉ (G.) THE STORAGE OF ELECTRICAL ENERGY, and Researches in the
Effects created by Currents combining Quantity with High Tension.
Translated from the French by Paul Bedford Elwell. With Portrait, and 89
Illustrations. 8vo. pp. vii.-268, cloth, 12_s._


_Small crown 8vo. cloth. With many Illustrations._

Whittaker's Library of Arts, Sciences, Manufactures and Industries.

MANAGEMENT OF ACCUMULATORS AND PRIVATE ELECTRIC LIGHT INSTALLATIONS. A
Practical Handbook by Sir David Salomons, Bart., M.A. 4th Edition, Revised
and Enlarged, with 32 Illustrations. Cloth, 3_s._

    "To say that this book is the best of its kind would be a poor
    compliment, as it is practically the only work on accumulators that
    has been written."--_Electrical Review._

ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENT-MAKING FOR AMATEURS. A Practical Handbook. By S. R.
Bottone, Author of "The Dynamo," &c. With 60 Illustrations. Third edition.
Cloth, 3_s._

ELECTRIC BELLS AND ALL ABOUT THEM. A Practical Book for Practical Men. By
S. R. Bottone. With more than 100 illustrations. Cloth, 3_s._

PRACTICAL IRON FOUNDING. By the Author of "Pattern Making," &c., &c.
Illustrated with over one hundred engravings. Cloth, 4_s._

THE PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS FROM LIGHTNING. A Treatise on the Theory of
Lightning Conductors from a Modern Point of View. Being the substance of
two lectures delivered before the Society of Arts in March, 1888. By
Oliver J. Lodge, LL.D., D.Sc., F.R.S., Professor of Physics in University
College, Liverpool.

    Published with various amplifications and additions, with the approval
    of the Society of Arts. [_In preparation._

ELECTRICAL INFLUENCE MACHINES: Containing a full account of their
historical development, their modern Forms, and their Practical
Construction. By J. Gray. B.Sc. [_In the press._

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING IN OUR HOMES AND WORKSHOPS. A Practical Handbook.
By Sydney F. Walker, M.Inst.C.E., M.I.E.E. [_Immediately._

_Others in preparation._


Technological Dictionaries.

_ENGLISH AND GERMAN._

WERSHOVEN (F. J.) TECHNOLOGICAL DICTIONARY OF THE PHYSICAL, MECHANICAL,
AND CHEMICAL SCIENCES. English and German. 2 vols. cloth, 5_s._

_ENGLISH-SPANISH._

PONCE DE LEON. TECHNOLOGICAL DICTIONARY. English-Spanish and
Spanish-English. Containing Terms employed in the Applied Sciences,
Industrial Arts, Mechanics, Fine Arts, Metallurgy, Machinery, Commerce,
Ship-building and Navigation, Civil and Military Engineering, Agriculture,
Railway Construction, Electro-technics, &c.

    Vol. I.--English-Spanish. 8vo. bound, £1 16_s._

    Vol. II.--Spanish-English. [_In preparation._

_Post 8vo. 814 pp. 10s. 6d._

HOBLYN'S DICTIONARY OF TERMS USED IN MEDICINE AND COLLATERAL SCIENCES,
_11th edition._ Revised throughout, with numerous Additions. By John A. P.
Price, B.A., M.D. Oxon., Assistant-Surgeon to the Royal Berkshire
Hospital.

    This new edition has undergone complete revision and emendation. Many
    terms, fallen more or less into disuse, have been omitted; and a
    considerable amount of fresh matter has been introduced, in order to
    meet the requirements of the present day.

_1 vol. demy 4to. with 25 Double and 40 Single Plates, £2 10s._

TECHNICAL SCHOOL AND COLLEGE BUILDING.

_Being a Treatise on the Design and Construction of Applied Science and
Art Buildings, and their suitable Fittings and Sanitation._

WITH A CHAPTER ON TECHNICAL EDUCATION.

BY EDWARD COOKWORTHY ROBINS, F.S.A.

OUTLINE OF CONTENTS.--Introduction--English and Foreign Technical
Education--Analysis of the Second Report of the Royal Commissioners on
Technical Education--Buildings for Applied Science and Art Instruction,
with examples of Foreign and English Buildings--Analysis of the Fittings
necessary for these Buildings--British and Foreign Examples of the Details
of the Fittings--Heating and Ventilation generally--Heating and
Ventilation necessary for Applied Science and Instruction Buildings--The
Planning of Buildings for Middle Class Education--Sanitary
Science--Appendix.

_Full prospectus post free on application._

    "It will prove an indispensable work of reference to architects,
    builders, and managers of technical schools."--_Spectator._

    "A most valuable contribution to architectural literature."--_British
    Architect._


THE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF IRON.

A Complete Account of all the Best Known Methods for the Analysis of Iron,
Steel, Ores, &c.

By A. A. BLAIR, Chief Chemist, U.S. Geological Survey, &c. Royal 8vo.
14_s._

_Just published._


THE

WORKING AND MANAGEMENT OF AN ENGLISH RAILWAY.

BY GEORGE FINDLAY,

_General Manager of the London and North-Western Railway._

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS.

Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._


  CHISWICK PRESS:--C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT,
  CHANCERY LANE.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Whittaker & Co.'s List of Classical,
Educational and Technical Works, by Whittaker & Co.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITTAKER'S LIST OF WORKS ***

***** This file should be named 40536-8.txt or 40536-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/5/3/40536/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
