The Project Gutenberg eBook, Two Little Confederates, by Thomas Nelson Page


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Two Little Confederates


Author: Thomas Nelson Page



Release Date: September 29, 2008  [eBook #26725]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LITTLE CONFEDERATES***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 26725-h.htm or 26725-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/6/7/2/26725/26725-h/26725-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/6/7/2/26725/26725-h.zip)





TWO LITTLE CONFEDERATES

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
BY THOMAS NELSON PAGE

Tommy Trot's Visit to Santa Claus

Santa Claus's Partner

A Captured Santa Claus

Among the Camps

Two Little Confederates

The Page Story Book


CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO LITTLE CONFEDERATES

by

THOMAS NELSON PAGE

Illustrated







[Illustration: "I'M IN COMMAND," SAID THE GENTLEMAN, SMILING AT HIM
OVER THE TOWEL.]



New York
Charles Scribner's Sons
1929

Copyright, 1888, by
Charles Scribner's Sons

Copyright, 1916, by
Thomas Nelson Page

Printed in the United States of America




TO MY MOTHER




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"I'm in command," said the gentleman,
smiling at him over the towel                       _Frontispiece_

                                                             PAGE
The old man walked up to the door, and
standing on one side, flung it open                            29

"Gentlemen, marsters, don't teck my horses,
ef you please," said Uncle Balla                               69

Frank and Willy capture a member of the
conscript-guard                                                95

The boy faced his captor, who held a strap
in one hand                                                   129

"Look! Look! They are running. They are
beating our men!" exclaimed the boys                          143

The boys sell their cakes to the Yankees                      159

Some of the servants came back to their old home              167




TWO LITTLE CONFEDERATES.




CHAPTER I.


The "Two Little Confederates" lived at Oakland. It was not a handsome
place, as modern ideas go, but down in Old Virginia, where the
standard was different from the later one, it passed in old times as
one of the best plantations in all that region. The boys thought it
the greatest place in the world, of course excepting Richmond, where
they had been one year to the fair, and had seen a man pull fire out
of his mouth, and do other wonderful things. It was quite secluded. It
lay, it is true, right between two of the county roads, the
Court-house Road being on one side, and on the other the great
"Mountain Road," down which the large covered wagons with six horses
and jingling bells used to go; but the lodge lay this side of the one,
and "the big woods," where the boys shot squirrels, and hunted
'possums and coons, and which reached to the edge of "Holetown,"
stretched between the house and the other, so that the big gate-post
where the semi-weekly mail was left by the mail-rider each Tuesday
and Friday afternoon was a long walk, even by the near cut through the
woods. The railroad was ten miles away by the road. There was a nearer
way, only about half the distance, by which the negroes used to walk
and which during the war, after all the horses were gone, the boys,
too, learned to travel; but before that, the road by Trinity Church
and Honeyman's Bridge was the only route, and the other was simply a
dim bridle-path, and the "horseshoe-ford" was known to the initiated
alone.

The mansion itself was known on the plantation as "the great-house,"
to distinguish it from all the other houses on the place, of which
there were many. It had as many wings as the angels in the vision of
Ezekiel.

These additions had been made, some in one generation, some in
another, as the size of the family required; and finally, when there
was no side of the original structure to which another wing could be
joined, a separate building had been erected on the edge of the yard
which was called "The Office," and was used as such, as well as for a
lodging-place by the young men of the family. The privilege of
sleeping in the Office was highly esteemed, for, like the _toga
virilis_, it marked the entrance upon manhood of the youths who were
fortunate enough to enjoy it. There smoking was admissible, there the
guns were kept in the corner, and there the dogs were allowed to
sleep at the feet of their young masters, or in bed with them, if they
preferred it.

In one of the rooms in this building the boys went to school whilst
small, and another they looked forward to having as their own when
they should be old enough to be elevated to the coveted dignity of
sleeping in the Office. Hugh already slept there, and gave himself
airs in proportion; but Hugh they regarded as a very aged person; not
as old, it was true, as their cousins who came down from college at
Christmas, and who, at the first outbreak of war, all rushed into the
army; but each of these was in the boys' eyes a Methuselah. Hugh had
his own horse and the double-barrelled gun, and when a fellow got
those there was little material difference between him and other men,
even if he did have to go to the academy,--which was really something
like going to school.

The boys were Frank and Willy; Frank being the eldest. They went by
several names on the place. Their mother called them her "little men,"
with much pride; Uncle Balla spoke of them as "them chillern," which
generally implied something of reproach; and Lucy Ann, who had been
taken into the house to "run after" them when they were little boys,
always coupled their names as "Frank 'n' Willy." Peter and Cole did
the same when their mistress was not by.

When there first began to be talk at Oakland about the war, the boys
thought it would be a dreadful thing; their principal ideas about war
being formed from an intimate acquaintance with the Bible and its
accounts of the wars of the Children of Israel, in which men, women
and children were invariably put to the sword. This gave a vivid
conception of its horrors.

One evening, in the midst of a discussion about the approaching
crisis, Willy astonished the company, who were discussing the merits
of probable leaders of the Union armies, by suddenly announcing that
he'd "bet they didn't have any general who could beat Joab."

Up to the time of the war, the boys had led a very uneventful, but a
very pleasant life. They used to go hunting with Hugh, their older
brother, when he would let them go, and after the cows with Peter and
Cole. Old Balla, the driver, was their boon comrade and adviser, and
taught them to make whips, and traps for hares and birds, as he had
taught them to ride and to cobble shoes.

He lived alone (for his wife had been set free years before, and lived
in Philadelphia). His room over "the old kitchen" was the boys'
play-room when he would permit them to come in. There were so many
odds and ends in it that it was a delightful place.

Then the boys played blindman's-buff in the house, or hide-and-seek
about the yard or garden, or upstairs in their den, a narrow alcove
at the top of the house.

The little willow-shadowed creek, that ran through the meadow behind
the barn, was one of their haunts. They fished in it for minnows and
little perch; they made dams and bathed in it; and sometimes they
played pirates upon its waters.

Once they made an extended search up and down its banks for any
fragments of Pharaoh's chariots which might have been washed up so
high; but that was when they were younger and did not have much
sense.




CHAPTER II.


There was great excitement at Oakland during the John Brown raid, and
the boys' grandmother used to pray for him and Cook, whose pictures
were in the papers.

The boys became soldiers, and drilled punctiliously with guns which
they got Uncle Balla to make for them. Frank was the captain, Willy
the first lieutenant, and a dozen or more little negroes composed the
rank and file, Peter and Cole being trusted file-closers.

A little later they found their sympathies all on the side of peace
and the preservation of the Union. Their uncle was for keeping the
Union unbroken, and ran for the Convention against Colonel Richards,
who was the chief officer of the militia in the county, and was as
blood-thirsty as Tamerlane, who reared the pyramid of skulls, and as
hungry for military renown as the great Napoleon, about whom the boys
had read.

There was immense excitement in the county over the election. Though
the boys' mother had made them add to their prayers a petition that
their Uncle William might win, and that he might secure the
blessings of peace; and, though at family prayers, night and morning,
the same petition was presented, the boys' uncle was beaten at the
polls by a large majority. And then they knew there was bound to be
war, and that it must be very wicked. They almost felt the "invader's
heel," and the invaders were invariably spoken of as "cruel," and the
heel was described as of "iron," and was always mentioned as engaged
in the act of crushing. They would have been terribly alarmed at this
cruel invasion had they not been reassured by the general belief of
the community that one Southerner could whip ten Yankees, and that,
collectively, the South could drive back the North with pop-guns. When
the war actually broke out, the boys were the most enthusiastic of
rebels, and the troops in Camp Lee did not drill more continuously nor
industriously.

Their father, who had been a Whig and opposed secession until the very
last, on Virginia's seceding, finally cast his lot with his people,
and joined an infantry company; and Uncle William raised and equipped
an artillery company, of which he was chosen captain; but the infantry
was too tame and the artillery too ponderous to suit the boys.

They were taken to see the drill of the county troop of cavalry, with
its prancing horses and clanging sabres. It was commanded by a cousin;
and from that moment they were cavalrymen to the core. They flung
away their stick-guns in disgust; and Uncle Balla spent two grumbling
days fashioning them a stableful of horses with real heads and "sure
'nough" leather bridles.

Once, indeed, a secret attempt was made to utilize the horses and
mules which were running in the back pasture; but a premature
discovery of the matter ended in such disaster to all concerned that
the plan was abandoned, and the boys had to content themselves with
their wooden steeds.

The day that the final orders came for their father and uncle to go to
Richmond,--from which point they were ordered to "the Peninsula,"--the
boys could not understand why every one was suddenly plunged into such
distress. Then, next morning, when the soldiers left, the boys could
not altogether comprehend it. They thought it was a very fine thing to
be allowed to ride Frank and Hun, the two war-horses, with their new,
deep army saddles and long bits. They cried when their father and
uncle said good-bye, and went away; but it was because their mother
looked so pale and ill, and not because they did not think it was all
grand. They had no doubt that all would come back soon, for old Uncle
Billy, the "head-man," who had been born down in "Little York," where
Cornwallis surrendered, had expressed the sentiment of the whole
plantation when he declared, as he sat in the back yard surrounded by
an admiring throng and surveyed the two glittering sabres which he had
no one but himself to polish, that "Ef them Britishers jest sees dese
swodes dee'll run!" The boys tried to explain to him that these were
not British, but Yankees,--but he was hard to convince. Even Lucy Ann,
who was incurably afraid of everything like a gun or fire-arm, partook
of the general fervor, and boasted effusively that she had actually
"tetched Marse John's big pistils."

Hugh, who was fifteen, and was permitted to accompany his father to
Richmond, was regarded by the boys with a feeling of mingled envy and
veneration, which he accepted with dignified complacency.

Frank and Willy soon found that war brought some immunities. The house
filled up so with the families of cousins and friends who were
refugees that the boys were obliged to sleep in the Office, and thus
they felt that, at a bound, they were almost as old as Hugh.

There were the cousins from Gloucester, from the Valley, and families
of relatives from Baltimore and New York, who had come south on the
declaration of war. Their favorite was their Cousin Belle, whose
beauty at once captivated both boys. This was the first time that the
boys knew anything of girls, except their own sister, Evelyn; and
after a brief period, during which the novelty gave them pleasure,
the inability of the girls to hunt, climb trees, or play knucks, etc.,
and the additional restraint which their presence imposed, caused them
to hold the opinion that "girls were no good."




CHAPTER III.


In course of time they saw a great deal of "the army,"--which meant
the Confederates. The idea that the Yankees could ever get to Oakland
never entered any one's head. It was understood that the army lay
between Oakland and them, and surely they could never get by the
innumerable soldiers who were always passing up one road or the other,
and who, day after day and night after night, were coming to be fed,
and were rapidly eating up everything that had been left on the place.
By the end of the first year they had been coming so long that they
made scarcely any difference; but the first time a regiment camped in
the neighborhood it created great excitement.

It became known one night that a cavalry regiment, in which were
several of their cousins, was encamped at Honeyman's Bridge, and the
boys' mother determined to send a supply of provisions for the camp
next morning; so several sheep were killed, the smoke-house was
opened, and all night long the great fires in the kitchen and
wash-house glowed; and even then there was not room, so that a big
fire was kindled in the back yard, beside which saddles of mutton
were roasted in the tin kitchens. Everybody was "rushing."

The boys were told that they might go to see the soldiers, and as they
had to get off long before daylight, they went to bed early, and left
all "the other boys"--that is, Peter and Cole and other colored
children--squatting about the fires and trying to help the cooks to
pile on wood.

It was hard to leave the exciting scene.

They were very sleepy the next morning; indeed, they seemed scarcely
to have fallen asleep when Lucy Ann shook them; but they jumped up
without the usual application of cold water in their faces, which Lucy
Ann so delighted to make; and in a little while they were out in the
yard, where Balla was standing holding three horses,--their mother's
riding-horse; another with a side-saddle for their Cousin Belle, whose
brother was in the regiment; and one for himself,--and Peter and Cole
were holding the carriage-horses for the boys, and several other men
were holding mules.

Great hampers covered with white napkins were on the porch, and the
savory smell decided the boys not to eat their breakfast, but to wait
and take their share with the soldiers.

The roads were so bad that the carriage could not go; and as the boys'
mother wished to get the provisions to the soldiers before they broke
camp, they had to set out at once. In a few minutes they were all in
the saddle, the boys and their mother and Cousin Belle in front, and
Balla and the other servants following close behind, each holding
before him a hamper, which looked queer and shadowy as they rode on in
the darkness.

The sky, which was filled with stars when they set out, grew white as
they splashed along mile after mile through the mud. Then the road
became clearer; they could see into the woods, and the sky changed to
a rich pink, like the color of peach-blossoms. Their horses were
covered with mud up to the saddle-skirts. They turned into a lane only
half a mile from the bridge, and, suddenly, a bugle rang out down in
the wooded bottom below them, and the boys hardly could be kept from
putting their horses to a run, so fearful were they that the soldiers
were leaving, and that they should not see them. Their mother,
however, told them that this was probably the reveille, or
"rising-bell," of the soldiers. She rode on at a good sharp canter,
and the boys were diverting themselves over a discussion as to who
would act the part of Lucy Ann in waking the regiment of soldiers,
when they turned a curve, and at the end of the road, a few hundred
yards ahead, stood several horsemen.

"There they are," exclaimed both boys.

"No, that is a picket," said their mother; "gallop on, Frank, and
tell them we are bringing breakfast for the regiment."

Frank dashed ahead, and soon they saw a soldier ride forward to meet
him, and, after a few words, return with him to his comrades. Then,
while they were still a hundred yards distant, they saw Frank, who had
received some directions, start off again toward the bridge, at a hard
gallop. The picket had told him to go straight on down the hill, and
he would find the camp just the other side of the bridge. He
accordingly rode on, feeling very important at being allowed to go
alone to the camp on such a mission.

As he reached a turn in the road, just above the river, the whole
regiment lay swarming below him among the large trees on the bank of
the little stream. The horses were picketed to bushes and stakes, in
long rows, the saddles lying on the ground, not far off; and hundreds
of men were moving about, some in full uniform and others without coat
or vest. A half-dozen wagons with sheets on them stood on one side
among the trees, near which several fires were smoking, with men
around them.

As Frank clattered up to the bridge, a soldier with a gun on his arm,
who had been standing by the railing, walked out to the middle of the
bridge.

"Halt! Where are you going in such a hurry, my young man?" he said.

"I wish to see the colonel," said Frank, repeating as nearly as he
could the words the picket had told him.

"What do you want with him?"

Frank was tempted not to tell him; but he was so impatient to deliver
his message before the others should arrive, that he told him what he
had come for.

"There he is," said the sentinel, pointing to a place among the trees
where stood at least five hundred men.

Frank looked, expecting to recognize the colonel by his noble bearing,
or splendid uniform, or some striking marks.

"Where?" he asked, in doubt; for while a number of the men were in
uniform, he knew these to be privates.

"There," said the sentry, pointing; "by that stump, near the yellow
horse-blanket."

Frank looked again. The only man he could fix upon by the description
was a young fellow, washing his face in a tin basin, and he felt that
this could not be the colonel; but he did not like to appear dull, so
he thanked the man and rode on, thinking he would go to the point
indicated, and ask some one else to show him the officer.

He felt quite grand as he rode in among the men, who, he thought,
would recognize his importance and treat him accordingly; but, as he
passed on, instead of paying him the respect he had expected, they
began to guy him with all sorts of questions.

"Hullo, bud, going to jine the cavalry?" asked one. "Which is oldest;
you or your horse?" inquired another.

"How's pa--and ma?" "Does your mother know you're out?" asked others.
One soldier walked up, and putting his hand on the bridle, proceeded
affably to ask him after his health, and that of every member of his
family. At first Frank did not understand that they were making fun of
him, but it dawned on him when the man asked him solemnly:

"Are there any Yankees around, that you were running away so fast just
now?"

"No; if there were I'd never have found _you_ here," said Frank,
shortly, in reply; which at once turned the tide in his favor and
diverted the ridicule from himself to his teaser, who was seized by
some of his comrades and carried off with much laughter and slapping
on the back.

"I wish to see Colonel Marshall," said Frank, pushing his way through
the group that surrounded him, and riding up to the man who was still
occupied at the basin on the stump.

"All right, sir, I'm the man," said the individual, cheerily looking
up with his face dripping and rosy from its recent scrubbing.

"You the colonel!" exclaimed Frank, suspicious that he was again being
ridiculed, and thinking it impossible that this slim, rosy-faced
youngster, who was scarcely stouter than Hugh, and who was washing in
a tin basin, could be the commander of all these soldierly-looking
men, many of whom were old enough to be his father.

"Yes, I'm the lieutenant-colonel. I'm in command," said the gentleman,
smiling at him over the towel.

Something made Frank understand that this was really the officer, and
he gave his message, which was received with many expressions of
thanks.

"Won't you get down? Here, Campbell, take this horse, will you?" he
called to a soldier, as Frank sprang from his horse. The orderly
stepped forward and took the bridle.

"Now, come with me," said the colonel, leading the way. "We must get
ready to receive your mother. There are some ladies coming--and
breakfast," he called to a group who were engaged in the same
occupation he had just ended, and whom Frank knew by instinct to be
officers.

The information seemed to electrify the little knot addressed; for
they began to rush around, and in a few moments they all were in their
uniforms, and surrounding the colonel, who, having brushed his hair
with the aid of a little glass hung on a bush, had hurried into his
coat and was buckling on his sword and giving orders in a way which at
once satisfied Frank that he was every inch a colonel.

"Now let us go and receive your mother," said he to the boy. As he
strode through the camp with his coat tightly buttoned, his soft hat
set jauntily on the side of his head, his plumes sweeping over its
side, and his sword clattering at his spurred heel, he presented a
very different appearance from that which he had made a little before,
with his head in a tin basin, and his face covered with lather. In
fact, Colonel Marshall was already a noted officer, and before the end
of the war he attained still higher rank and reputation.

The colonel met the rest of the party at the bridge, and introduced
himself and several officers who soon joined him. The negroes were
directed to take the provisions over to the other side of the stream
into the camp, and in a little while the whole regiment were enjoying
the breakfast. The boys and their mother had at the colonel's request
joined his mess, in which was one of their cousins, the brother of
their cousin Belle.

The gentlemen could eat scarcely anything, they were so busy attending
to the wants of the ladies. The colonel, particularly, waited on their
cousin Belle all the time.

As soon as they had finished the colonel left them, and a bugle blew.
In a minute all was bustle. Officers were giving orders; horses were
saddled and brought out; and by what seemed magic to the boys, the
men, who just before were scattered about among the trees laughing
and eating, were standing by their horses all in proper order. The
colonel and the officers came and said good-bye.

Again the bugle blew. Every man was in his saddle. A few words by the
colonel, followed by other words from the captains, and the column
started, turning across the bridge, the feet of the horses thundering
on the planks. Then the regiment wound up the hill at a walk, the men
singing snatches of a dozen songs of which "The Bonnie Blue Flag,"
"Lorena," and "Carry Me Back to Old Virginia Shore," were the chief
ones.

It seemed to the boys that to be a soldier was the noblest thing on
earth; and that this regiment could do anything.




CHAPTER IV.


After this it became a common thing for passing regiments to camp near
Oakland, and the fire blazed many a night, cooking for the soldiers,
till the chickens were crowing in the morning. The negroes all had
hen-houses and raised their own chickens, and when a camp was near
them they used to drive a thriving trade on their own account, selling
eggs and chickens to the privates while the officers were entertained
in the "gret house."

It was thought an honor to furnish food to the soldiers. Every soldier
was to the boys a hero, and each young officer might rival Ivanhoe or
Coeur de Lion.

It was not a great while, however, before they learned that all
soldiers were not like their favorite knights. At any rate, thefts
were frequent. The absence of men from the plantations, and the
constant passing of strangers made stealing easy; hen-roots were
robbed time after time, and even pigs and sheep were taken without any
trace of the thieves. The boys' hen-house, however, which was in the
yard, had never been troubled. It was about their only possession, and
they took great pride in it.

One night the boys were fast asleep in their room in the office, with
old Bruno and Nick curled up on their sheep-skins on the floor. Hugh
was away, so the boys were the only "men" on the place, and felt that
they were the protectors of the plantation. The frequent thefts had
made every one very suspicious, and the boys had made up their minds
to be on the watch, and, if possible, to catch the thief.

The negroes said that the deserters did the stealing.

On the night in question, the boys were sound asleep when old Bruno
gave a low growl, and then began walking and sniffing up and down the
room. Soon Nick gave a sharp, quick bark.

Frank waked first. He was not startled, for the dogs were in the habit
of barking whenever they wished to go out-of-doors. Now, however, they
kept it up, and it was in a strain somewhat different from their usual
signal.

"What's the matter with you? Go and lie down, Bruno," called Frank.
"Hush up, Nick!" But Bruno would not lie down, and Nick would not keep
quiet, though at the sound of Frank's voice they felt less
responsibility, and contented themselves with a low growling.

After a little while Frank was on the point of dropping off to sleep
again, when he heard a sound out in the yard, which at once thoroughly
awakened him. He nudged Willy in the side.

"Willy--Willy, wake up; there's some one moving around outdoors."

"Umm-mm," groaned Willy, turning over and settling himself for another
nap.

The sound of a chicken chirping out in fright reached Frank's ear.

"Wake up, Willy!" he called, pinching him hard. "There's some one at
the hen-house."

Willy was awake in a second. The boys consulted as to what should be
done. Willy was sceptical. He thought Frank had been dreaming, or that
it was only Uncle Balla, or "some one" moving about the yard. But a
second cackle of warning reached them, and in a minute both boys were
out of bed pulling on their clothes with trembling impatience.

"Let's go and wake Uncle Balla," proposed Willy, getting himself all
tangled in the legs of his trousers.

"No; I'll tell you what, let's catch him ourselves," suggested Frank.

"All right," assented Willy. "We'll catch him and lock him up; suppose
he's got a pistol? your gun maybe won't go off; it doesn't always
burst the cap."

"Well, your old musket is loaded, and you can hold him, while I snap
the cap at him, and get it ready."

"All right--I can't find my jacket--I'll hold him."

"Where in the world is my hat?" whispered Frank. "Never mind, it must
be in the house. Let's go out the back way. We can get out without his
hearing us."

"What shall we do with the dogs? Let's shut them up."

"No, let's take 'em with us. We can keep them quiet and hold 'em in,
and they can track him if he gets away."

"All right;" and the boys slowly opened the door, and crept stealthily
out, Frank clutching his double-barrelled gun, and Willy hugging a
heavy musket which he had found and claimed as one of the prizes of
war. It was almost pitch-dark.

They decided that one should take one side of the hen-house, and one
the other side (in such a way that if they had to shoot, they would
almost certainly shoot one another!) but before they had separated
both dogs jerked loose from their hands and dashed away in the
darkness, barking furiously.

"There he goes round the garden," shouted Willy, as the sound of
footsteps like those of a man running with all his might came from the
direction which the dogs had taken.

"Come on," and both started; but, after taking a few steps, they
stopped to listen so that they might trace the fugitive.

A faint noise behind them arrested their attention, and Frank tiptoed
back toward the hen-house. It was too dark to see much, but he heard
the hen-house door creak, and was conscious even in the darkness that
it was being pushed slowly open.

"Here's one, Willy," he shouted, at the same time putting his gun to
his shoulder and pulling the trigger. The hammer fell with a sharp
"click" just as the door was snatched to with a bang. The cap had
failed to explode, or the chicken-eating days of the individual in the
hen-house would have ended then and there.

The boys stood for some moments with their guns pointed at the door of
the hen-house expecting the person within to attempt to burst out; but
the click of the hammer and their hurried conference without, in which
it was promptly agreed to let him have both barrels if he appeared,
reconciled him to remaining within.

After some time it was decided to go and wake Uncle Balla, and confer
with him as to the proper disposition of their captive. Accordingly,
Frank went off to obtain help, while Willy remained to watch the
hen-house. As Frank left he called back:

"Willy, you take good aim at him, and if he pokes his head out--let
him have it!"

This Willy solemnly promised to do.

Frank was hardly out of hearing before Willy was surprised to hear the
prisoner call him by name in the most friendly and familiar manner,
although the voice was a strange one.

"Willy, is that you?" called the person inside.

"Yes."

"Where's Frank?"

"Gone to get Uncle Balla."

"Did you see that other fellow?"

"Yes."

"I wish you'd shot him. He brought me here and played a joke on me. He
told me this was a house I could sleep in, and shut me up in
here,--and blest if I don't b'lieve it's nothin' but a hen-house. Let
me out here a minute," he continued, after a pause, cajolingly.

"No, I won't," said Willy firmly, getting his gun ready.

There was a pause, and then from the depths of the hen-house issued
the most awful groan:

"Umm! Ummm!! Ummmm!!!"

Willy was frightened.

"Umm! Umm!" was repeated.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Willy, feeling sorry in spite of
himself.

"Oh! Oh! Oh! I'm so sick," groaned the man in the hen-house.

"How? What's the matter?"

"That man that fooled me in here gave me something to drink, and it's
pizened me; oh! oh! oh! I'm dying."

It was a horrible groan.

Willy's heart relented. He moved to the door and was just about to
open it to look in when a light flashed across the yard from Uncle
Balla's house, and he saw him coming with a flaming light-wood knot in
his hand.




CHAPTER V.


Instead of opening the door, therefore, Willy called to the old man,
who was leisurely crossing the yard: "Run, Uncle Balla. Quick, run!"

At the call Old Balla and Frank set out as fast as they could.

"What's the matter? Is he done kill de chickens? Is he done got away?"
the old man asked, breathlessly.

"No, he's dyin'," shouted Willy.

"Hi! is you shoot him?" asked the old driver.

"No, that other man's poisoned him. He was the robber and he fooled
this one," explained Willy, opening the door and peeping anxiously in.

"Go 'long, boy,--now, d'ye ever heah de better o' dat?--dat man's
foolin' wid you; jes' tryin' to git yo' to let him out."

"No, he isn't," said Willy; "you ought to have heard him."

But both Balla and Frank were laughing at him, so he felt very
shamefaced. He was relieved by hearing another groan.

"Oh, oh, oh! Ah, ah!"

"You hear that?" he asked, triumphantly.

"I boun' I'll see what's the matter with him, the roscol! Stan' right
dyah, y' all, an' if he try to run shoot him, but mine you don' hit
_me_," and the old man walked up to the door, and standing on one side
flung it open. "What you doin' in dyah after dese chillern's
chickens?" he called fiercely.

"Hello, old man, 's 'at you? I's mighty sick," muttered the person
within. Old Balla held his torch inside the house, amid a confused
cackle and flutter of fowls.

"Well, ef 'tain' a white man, and a soldier at dat!" he exclaimed.
"What you doin' heah, robbin' white folks' hen-roos'?" he called,
roughly. "Git up off dat groun'; you ain' sick."

"Let me get up, Sergeant,--hic--don't you heah the roll-call?--the
tent's mighty dark; what you fool me in here for?" muttered the man
inside.

The boys could see that he was stretched out on the floor, apparently
asleep, and that he was a soldier in uniform. Balla stepped inside.

"Is he dead?" asked both boys as Balla caught him by the arms, lifted
him, and let him fall again limp on the floor.

"Nor, he's dead-drunk," said Balla, picking up an empty flask. "Come
on out. Let me see what I gwi' do wid you?" he said, scratching his
head.

[Illustration: THE OLD MAN WALKED UP TO THE DOOR, AND STANDING ON ONE
SIDE FLUNG IT OPEN.]

"I know what I gwi' do wid you. I gwi' lock you up right whar you is."

"Uncle Balla, s'pose he gets well, won't he get out?"

"Ain' _I_ gwi' lock him up? Dat's good from you, who was jes' gwi' let
'im out ef me an' Frank hadn't come up when we did."

Willy stepped back abashed. His heart accused him and told him the
charge was true. Still he ventured one more question:

"Hadn't you better take the hens out?"

"Nor; 'tain' no use to teck nuttin' out dyah. Ef he comes to, he know
we got 'im, an' he dyahson' trouble nuttin'."

And the old man pushed to the door and fastened the iron hasp over the
strong staple. Then, as the lock had been broken, he took a large nail
from his pocket and fastened it in the staple with a stout string so
that it could not be shaken out. All the time he was working he was
talking to the boys, or rather to himself, for their benefit.

"Now, you see ef we don' find him heah in the mornin'! Willy jes' gwi'
let you get 'way, but a _man_ got you now, wha'ar' been handlin'
horses an' know how to hole 'em in the stalls. I boun' he'll have to
butt like a ram to git out dis log hen-house," he said, finally, as he
finished tying the last knot in his string, and gave the door a
vigorous rattle to test its strength.

Willy had been too much abashed at his mistake to fully appreciate all
of the witticisms over the prisoner, but Frank enjoyed them almost as
much as Unc' Balla himself.

"Now y' all go 'long to bed, an' I'll go back an' teck a little nap
myself," said he, in parting. "Ef he gits out that hen-house I'll give
you ev'y chicken I got. But he am' _gwine_ git out. A _man's_ done
fasten him up dyah."

The boys went off to bed, Willy still feeling depressed over his
ridiculous mistake. They were soon fast asleep, and if the dogs barked
again they did not hear them.

The next thing they knew, Lucy Ann, convulsed with laughter, was
telling them a story about Uncle Balla and the man in the hen-house.
They jumped up, and pulling on their clothes ran out in the yard,
thinking to see the prisoner.

Instead of doing so, they found Uncle Balla standing by the hen-house
with a comical look of mystification and chagrin; the roof had been
lifted off at one end and not only the prisoner, but every chicken was
gone!

The boys were half inclined to cry; Balla's look, however, set them to
laughing.

"Unc' Balla, you got to give me every chicken you got, 'cause you said
you would," said Willy.

"Go 'way from heah, boy. Don' pester me when I studyin' to see which
way he got out."

"You ain't never had a horse get through the roof before, have you?"
said Frank.

"Go 'way from here, I tell you," said the old man, walking around the
house, looking at it.

As the boys went back to wash and dress themselves, they heard Balla
explaining to Lucy Ann and some of the other servants that "the man
them chillern let git away had just come back and tooken out the one
he had locked up"; a solution of the mystery he always stoutly
insisted upon.

One thing, however, the person's escape effected--it prevented Willy's
ever hearing any more of his mistake; but that did not keep him now
and then from asking Uncle Balla "if he had fastened his horses
well."




CHAPTER VI.


These hens were not the last things stolen from Oakland. Nearly all
the men in the country had gone with the army. Indeed, with the
exception of a few overseers who remained to work the farms, every man
in the neighborhood, between the ages of seventeen and fifty, was in
the army. The country was thus left almost wholly unprotected, and it
would have been entirely so but for the "Home Guard," as it was
called, which was a company composed of young boys and the few old men
who remained at home, and who had volunteered for service as a local
guard, or police body, for the neighborhood of their homes.

Occasionally, too, later on, a small detachment of men, under a leader
known as a "conscript-officer," would come through the country hunting
for any men who were subject to the conscript law but who had evaded
it, and for deserters who had run away from the army and refused to
return.

These two classes of troops, however, stood on a very different
footing. The Home Guard was regarded with much respect, for it was
composed of those whose extreme age or youth alone withheld them from
active service; and every youngster in its ranks looked upon it as a
training school, and was ready to die in defence of his home if need
were, and, besides, expected to obtain permission to go into the army
"next year."

The conscript-guard, on the other hand, were grown men, and were
thought to be shirking the very dangers and hardships into which they
were trying to force others.

A few miles from Oakland, on the side toward the mountain road and
beyond the big woods, lay a district of virgin forest and old-field
pines which, even before the war, had acquired a reputation of an
unsavory nature, though its inhabitants were a harmless people. No
highways ran through this region, and the only roads which entered it
were mere wood-ways, filled with bushes and carpeted with pine-tags;
and, being travelled only by the inhabitants, appeared to outsiders
"to jes' peter out," as the phrase went. This territory was known by
the unpromising name of Holetown.

Its denizens were a peculiar but kindly race known to the boys as
"poor white folks," and called by the negroes, with great contempt,
"po' white trash." Some of them owned small places in the pines; but
the majority were simply tenants. They were an inoffensive people, and
their worst vices were intemperance and evasion of the tax-laws.

They made their living--or rather, they existed--by fishing and
hunting; and, to eke it out, attempted the cultivation of little
patches of corn and tobacco near their cabins, or in the bottoms where
small branches ran into the stream already mentioned.

In appearance they were usually so thin and sallow that one had to
look at them twice to see them clearly. At best, they looked vague and
illusive.

They were brave enough. At the outbreak of the war nearly all of the
men in this community enlisted, thinking, as many others did, that war
was more like play than work, and consisted more of resting than of
laboring. Although most of them, when in battle, showed the greatest
fearlessness, yet the duties of camp soon became irksome to them, and
they grew sick of the restraint and drilling of camp-life; so some of
them, when refused a furlough, took it, and came home. Others stayed
at home after leave had ended, feeling secure in their stretches of
pine and swamp, not only from the feeble efforts of the
conscript-guard, but from any parties who might be sent in search of
them.

In this way it happened, as time went by, that Holetown became known
to harbor a number of deserters.

According to the negroes, it was full of them; and many stories were
told about glimpses of men dodging behind trees in the big woods, or
rushing away through the underbrush like wild cattle. And, though the
grown people doubted whether the negroes had not been startled by some
of the hogs, which were quite wild, feeding in the woods, the boys
were satisfied that the negroes really had seen deserters.

This became a certainty when there came report after report of these
wood-skulkers, and when the conscript-guard, with the brightest of
uniforms, rode by with as much show and noise as if on a fox-hunt.
Then it became known that deserters were, indeed, infesting the piny
district of Holetown, and in considerable numbers.

Some of them, it was said, were pursuing agriculture and all their
ordinary vocations as openly as in time of peace, and more
industriously. They had a regular code of signals, and nearly every
person in the Holetown settlement was in league with them.

When the conscript-guard came along, there would be a rush of
tow-headed children through the woods, or some of the women about the
cabins would blow a horn lustily; after which not a man could be found
in all the district. The horn told just how many men were in the
guard, and which path they were following; every member of the troop
being honored with a short, quick "toot."

"What are you blowing-that horn for?" sternly asked the guard one
morning of an old woman,--old Mrs. Hall who stood out in front of her
little house blowing like Boreas in the pictures.

"Jes' blowin' fur Millindy to come to dinner," she said, sullenly.
"Can't y' all let a po' 'ooman call her gals to git some'n' to eat?
You got all her boys in d'army, killin' 'em; whyn't yo' go and git
kilt some yo'self, 'stidder ridin' 'bout heah tromplin' all over po'
folk's chickens?"

When the troop returned in the evening, she was still blowing;
"blowin' fur Millindy to come home," she said, with more sharpness
than before. But there must have been many Millindys, for horns were
sounding all through the settlement.

The deserters, at such times, were said to take to the swamps, and
marvellous rumors were abroad of one or more caves, all fitted up,
wherein they concealed themselves, like the robbers in the stories the
boys were so fond of reading.

After a while thefts of pigs and sheep became so common that they were
charged to the deserters.

Finally it grew to be such a pest that the ladies in the neighborhood
asked the Home Guard to take action in the matter, and after some
delay it became known that this valorous body was going to invade
Holetown and capture the deserters or drive them away. Hugh was to
accompany them, of course; and he looked very handsome, as well as
very important, when he started out on horseback to join the troop.
It was his first active service; and with his trousers in his boots
and his pistol in his belt he looked as brave as Julius Cæsar, and
quite laughed at his mother's fears for him, as she kissed him
good-bye and walked out with him to his horse, which Balla held at the
gate.

The boys asked leave to go with him; but Hugh was so scornful over
their request, and looked so soldierly as he galloped away with the
other men that the boys felt as cheap as possible.




CHAPTER VII.


When the boys went into the house they found that their Aunt Mary had
a headache that morning, and, even with the best intentions of doing
her duty in teaching them, had been forced to go to bed. Their mother
was too much occupied with her charge of providing for a family of
over a dozen white persons, and five times as many colored dependents,
to give any time to acting as substitute in the school-room, so the
boys found themselves with a holiday before them. It seemed vain to
try to shoot duck on the creek, and the perch were averse to biting.
The boys accordingly determined to take both guns and to set out for a
real hunt in the big woods.

They received their mother's permission, and after a lunch was
prepared they started in high glee, talking about the squirrels and
birds they expected to kill.

Frank had his gun, and Willy had the musket; and both carried a
plentiful supply of powder and some tolerably round slugs made from
cartridges.

They usually hunted in the part of the woods nearest the house, and
they knew that game was not very abundant there; so, as a good long
day was before them, they determined to go over to the other side of
the woods.

They accordingly pushed on, taking a path which led through the
forest. They went entirely through the big woods without seeing
anything but one squirrel, and presently found themselves at the
extreme edge of Holetown. They were just grumbling at the lack of game
when they heard a distant horn. The sound came from perhaps a mile or
more away, but was quite distinct.

"What's that? Somebody fox-hunting?--or is it a dinner-horn?" asked
Willy, listening intently.

"It's a horn to warn deserters, that's what 'tis," said Frank, pleased
to show his superior knowledge.

"I tell you what to do:--let's go and hunt deserters," said Willy,
eagerly.

"All right. Won't that be fun!" and both boys set out down the road
toward a point where they knew one of the paths ran into the
pine-district, talking of the numbers of prisoners they expected to
take.

In an instant they were as alert and eager as young hounds on a trail.
They had mapped out a plan before, and they knew exactly what they had
to do. Frank was the captain, by right of his being older; and Willy
was lieutenant, and was to obey orders. The chief thing that troubled
them was that they did not wish to be seen by any of the women or
children about the cabins, for they all knew the boys, because they
were accustomed to come to Oakland for supplies; then, too, the boys
wished to remain on friendly terms with their neighbors. Another thing
worried them. They did not know what to do with their prisoners after
they should have captured them. However, they pushed on and soon came
to a dim cart-way, which ran at right-angles to the main road and
which went into the very heart of Holetown. Here they halted to
reconnoitre and to inspect their weapons.

Even from the main road, the track, as it led off through the
overhanging woods with thick underbrush of chinquapin bushes, appeared
to the boys to have something strange about it, though they had at
other times walked it from end to end. Still, they entered boldly,
clutching their guns. Willy suggested that they should go in Indian
file and that the rear one should step in the other's footprints as
the Indians do; but Frank thought it was best to walk abreast, as the
Indians walked in their peculiar way only to prevent an enemy who
crossed their trail from knowing how many they were; and, so far from
it being any disadvantage for the deserters to know _their_ number, it
was even better that they should know there were two, so that they
would not attack from the rear. Accordingly, keeping abreast, they
struck in; each taking the woods on one side of the road, which he
was to watch and for which he was to be responsible.

The farther they went the more indistinct the track became, and the
wilder became the surrounding woods. They proceeded with great
caution, examining every particularly thick clump of bushes; peeping
behind each very large tree; and occasionally even taking a glance up
among its boughs; for they had themselves so often planned how, if
pursued, they would climb trees and conceal themselves, that they
would not have been at all surprised to find a fierce deserter, armed
to the teeth, crouching among the branches.

Though they searched carefully every spot where a deserter could
possibly lurk, they passed through the oak woods and were deep in the
pines without having seen any foe or heard a noise which could
possibly proceed from one. A squirrel had daringly leaped from the
trunk of a hickory-tree and run into the woods, right before them,
stopping impudently to take a good look at them; but they were hunting
larger game than squirrels, and they resisted the temptation to take a
shot at him,--an exercise of virtue which brought them a distinct
feeling of pleasure. They were, however, beginning to be embarrassed
as to their next course. They could hear the dogs barking farther on
in the pines, and knew they were approaching the vicinity of the
settlement; for they had crossed the little creek which ran through a
thicket of elder bushes and "gums," and which marked the boundary of
Holetown. Little paths, too, every now and then turned off from the
main track and went into the pines, each leading to a cabin or bit of
creek-bottom deeper in. They therefore were in a real dilemma
concerning what to do; and Willy's suggestion, to eat lunch, was a
welcome one. They determined to go a little way into the woods, where
they could not be seen, and had just taken the lunch out of the
game-bag and were turning into a by-path, when they met a man who was
coming along at a slow, lounging walk, and carrying a long
single-barrelled shot-gun across his arm.

When first they heard him, they thought he might be a deserter; but
when he came nearer they saw that he was simply a countryman out
hunting; for his old game-bag (from which peeped a squirrel's tail)
was over his shoulder, and he had no weapon at all, excepting that old
squirrel-gun.

"Good morning, sir," said both boys, politely.

"Mornin'! What luck y' all had?" he asked good-naturedly, stopping and
putting the butt of his gun on the ground, and resting lazily on it,
preparatory to a chat.

"We're not hunting; we're hunting deserters."

"Huntin' deserters!" echoed the man with a smile which broke into a
chuckle of amusement as the thought worked its way into his brain.
"Ain't you see' none?"

"No," said both boys in a breath, greatly pleased at his friendliness.
"Do you know where any are?"

The man scratched his head, seeming to reflect.

"Well, 'pears to me I hearn tell o' some, 'roun' to'des that-a-ways,"
making a comprehensive sweep of his arm in the direction just opposite
to that which the boys were taking. "I seen the conscrip'-guard a
little while ago pokin' 'roun' this-a-way; but Lor', that ain' the way
to ketch deserters. I knows every foot o' groun' this-a-way, an' ef
they was any deserters roun' here I'd be mighty apt to know it."

This announcement was an extinguisher to the boys' hopes. Clearly,
they were going in the wrong direction.

"We are just going to eat our lunch," said Frank; "won't you join us?"

Willy added his invitation to his brother's, and their friend politely
accepted, suggesting that they should walk back a little way and find
a log. This all three did; and in a few minutes they were enjoying the
lunch which the boys' mother had provided, while the stranger was
telling the boys his views about deserters, which, to say the least,
were very original.

"I seen the conscrip'-guard jes' this mornin', ridin' 'round whar they
knowd they warn' no deserters, but ole womens and children," he said
with his mouth full. "Whyn't they go whar they knows deserters _is_?"
he asked.

"Where are they? We heard they had a cave down on the river, and we
were going there," declared the boys.

"Down on the river?--a cave? Ain' no cave down thar, without it's
below Rockett's mill; fur I've hunted and fished ev'y foot o' that
river up an' down both sides, an' 'tain' a hole thar, big enough to
hide a' ole hyah, I ain' know."

This proof was too conclusive to admit of further argument.

"Why don't _you_ go in the army?" asked Willy, after a brief
reflection.

"What? Why don't _I_ go in the army?" repeated the hunter. "Why, I's
_in_ the army! You didn' think I warn't in the army, did you?"

The hunter's tone and the expression of his face were so full of
surprise that Willy felt deeply mortified at his rudeness, and began
at once to stammer something to explain himself.

"I b'longs to Colonel Marshall's regiment," continued the man, "an'
I's been home sick on leave o' absence. Got wounded in the leg, an'
I's jes' gettin' well. I ain' rightly well enough to go back now, but
I's anxious to git back; I'm gwine to-morrow mornin' ef I don' go this
evenin'. You see I kin hardly walk now!" and to demonstrate his
lameness, he got up and limped a few yards. "I ain' well yit," he
pursued, returning and dropping into his seat on the log, with his
face drawn up by the pain the exertion had brought on.

"Let me see your wound. Is it sore now?" asked Willy, moving nearer to
the man with a look expressive of mingled curiosity and sympathy.

"You can't see it; it's up heah," said the soldier, touching the upper
part of his hip; "an' I got another one heah," he added, placing his
hand very gently to his side. "This one's whar a Yankee run me through
with his sword. Now, that one was where a piece of shell hit me,--I
don't keer nothin' 'bout that," and he opened his shirt and showed a
triangular, purple scar on his shoulder.

"You certainly must be a brave soldier," exclaimed both boys,
impressed at sight of the scar, their voices softened by fervent
admiration.

"Yes, I kep' up with the bes' of 'em," he said, with a pleased smile.

Suddenly a horn began to blow, "toot--toot--toot," as if all the
"Millindys" in the world were being summoned. It was so near the boys
that it quite startled them.

"That's for the deserters, now," they both exclaimed.

Their friend looked calmly up and down the road, both ways.

"Them rascally conscrip'-guard been tellin' you all that, to gi' 'em
some excuse for keepin' out o' th' army theyselves--that's all. Th'
ain' gwine ketch no deserters any whar in all these parts, an' you kin
tell 'em so. I'm gwine down thar an' see what that horn's a-blowin'
fur; hit's somebody's dinner horn, or somp'n'," he added, rising and
taking up his game-bag.

"Can't we go with you?" asked the boys.

"Well, nor, I reckon you better not," he drawled; "thar's some right
bad dogs down thar in the pines,--mons'us bad; an' I's gwine cut
through the woods an' see ef I can't pick up a squ'rr'l, gwine 'long,
for the ole 'ooman's supper, as I got to go 'way to-night or
to-morrow; she's mighty poorly."

"Is she poorly much?" asked Willy, greatly concerned. "We'll get mamma
to come and see her to-morrow, and bring her some bread."

"Nor, she ain' so sick; that is to say, she jis' poorly and 'sturbed
in her mind. She gittin' sort o' old. Here, y' all take these
squ'rr'ls," he said, taking the squirrels from his old game-bag and
tossing them at Willy's feet. Both boys protested, but he insisted.
"Oh, yes; I kin get some mo' fur her.

"Y' all better go home. Well, good-bye, much obliged to you," and he
strolled off with his gun in the bend of his arm, leaving the boys to
admire and talk over his courage.

They turned back, and had gone about a quarter of a mile, when they
heard a great trampling of horses behind them. They stopped to listen,
and in a little while a squadron of cavalry came in sight. The boys
stepped to one side of the road to wait for them, eager to tell the
important information they had received from their friend, that there
were no deserters in that section. In a hurried consultation they
agreed not to tell that they had been hunting deserters themselves, as
they knew the soldiers would only have a laugh at their expense.

"Hello, boys, what luck?" called the officer in the lead, in a
friendly manner.

They told him they had not shot anything; that the squirrels had been
given to them; and then both boys inquired:

"You all hunting for deserters?"

"You seen any?" asked the leader, carelessly, while one or two men
pressed their horses forward eagerly.

"No, th' ain't any deserters in this direction at all," said the boys,
with conviction in their manner.

"How do you know?" asked the officer.

"'Cause a gentleman told us so."

"Who? When? What gentleman?"

"A gentleman who met us a little while ago."

"How long ago? Who was he?"

"Don't know who he was," said Frank.

"When we were eating our snack," put in Willy, not to be left out.

"How was he dressed? Where was it? What sort of man was he?" eagerly
inquired the leading trooper.

The boys proceeded to describe their friend, impressed by the intense
interest accorded them by the listeners.

"He was a sort of man with red hair, and wore a pair of gray breeches
and an old pair of shoes, and was in his shirt-sleeves." Frank was the
spokesman.

"And he had a gun--a long squirrel-gun," added Willy, "and he said he
belonged to Colonel Marshall's regiment."

"Why, that's Tim Mills. He's a deserter himself," exclaimed the
captain.

"No, he ain't--_he_ ain't any deserter," protested both at once. "He
is a mighty brave soldier, and he's been home on a furlough to get
well of a wound on his leg where he was shot."

"Yes, and it ain't well yet, but he's going back to his command
to-night or to-morrow morning; and he's got another wound in his side
where a Yankee ran him through with his sword. We know _he_ ain't any
deserter."

"How do you know all this?" asked the officer.

"He told us so himself, just now--a little while ago, that is," said
the boys.

The man laughed.

"Why, he's fooled you to death. That's Tim himself, that's been doing
all the devilment about here. He is the worst deserter in the whole
gang."

"We saw the wound on his shoulder," declared the boys, still doubting.

"I know it; he's got one there,--that's what I know him by. Which way
did he go,--and how long has it been?"

"He went that way, down in the woods; and it's been some time. He's
got away now."

The lads by this time were almost convinced of their mistake; but they
could not prevent their sympathy from being on the side of their late
agreeable companion.

"We'll catch the rascal," declared the leader, very fiercely. "Come
on, men,--he can't have gone far;" and he wheeled his horse about and
dashed back up the road at a great pace, followed by his men. The boys
were half inclined to follow and aid in the capture; but Frank, after
a moment's thought, said solemnly:

"No, Willy; an Arab never betrays a man who has eaten his salt. This
man has broken bread with us; we cannot give him up. I don't think we
ought to have told about him as much as we did."

This was an argument not to be despised.

A little later, as the boys trudged home, they heard the horns blowing
again a regular "toot-toot" for "Millindy." It struck them that
supper followed dinner very quickly in Holetown.

When the troop passed by in the evening the men were in very bad
humor. They had had a fruitless addition to their ride, and some of
them were inclined to say that the boys had never seen any man at all,
which the boys thought was pretty silly, as the man had eaten at least
two-thirds of their lunch.

Somehow the story got out, and Hugh was very scornful because the boys
had given their lunch to a deserter.




CHAPTER VIII.


As time went by the condition of things at Oakland changed--as it did
everywhere else. The boys' mother, like all the other ladies of the
country, was so devoted to the cause that she gave to the soldiers
until there was nothing left. After that there was a failure of the
crops, and the immediate necessities of the family and the hands on
the place were great.

There was no sugar nor coffee nor tea. These luxuries had been given
up long before. An attempt was made to manufacture sugar out of the
sorghum, or sugar-cane, which was now being cultivated as an
experiment; but it proved unsuccessful, and molasses made from the
cane was the only sweetening. The boys, however, never liked anything
sweetened with molasses, so they gave up everything that had molasses
in it. Sassafras tea was tried as a substitute for tea, and a drink
made out of parched corn and wheat, of burnt sweet potato and other
things, in the place of coffee; but none of them were fit to drink--at
least so the boys thought. The wheat crop proved a failure; but the
corn turned out very fine, and the boys learned to live on corn bread,
as there was no wheat bread.

The soldiers still came by, and the house was often full of young
officers who came to see the boys' cousins. The boys used to ride the
horses to and from the stables, and, being perfectly fearless, became
very fine riders.

Several times, among the visitors, came the young colonel who had
commanded the regiment that had camped at the bridge the first year of
the war. It did not seem to the boys that Cousin Belle liked him, for
she took much longer to dress when he came; and if there were other
officers present she would take very little notice of the colonel.

Both boys were in love with her, and after considerable hesitation had
written her a joint letter to tell her so, at which she laughed
heartily and kissed them both and called them her sweethearts. But,
though they were jealous of several young officers who came from time
to time, they felt sorry for the colonel,--their cousin was so mean to
him. They were on the best terms with him, and had announced their
intention of going into his regiment if only the war should last long
enough. When he came there was always a scramble to get his horse;
though of all who came to Oakland he rode the wildest horses, as both
boys knew by practical experience.

At length the soldiers moved off too far to permit them to come on
visits, and things were very dull. So it was for a long while.

But one evening in May, about sunset, as the boys were playing in the
yard, a man came riding through the place on the way to Richmond. His
horse showed that he had been riding hard. He asked the nearest way to
"Ground-Squirrel Bridge." The Yankees, he said, were coming. It was a
raid. He had ridden ahead of them, and had left them about Greenbay
depot, which they had set on fire. He was in too great a hurry to stop
and get something to eat, and he rode off, leaving much excitement
behind him; for Greenbay was only eight miles away, and Oakland lay
right between two roads to Richmond, down one or the other of which
the party of raiders must certainly pass.

It was the first time the boys ever saw their mother exhibit so much
emotion as she then did. She came to the door and called:

"Balla, come here." Her voice sounded to the boys a little strained
and troubled, and they ran up the steps and stood by her. Balla came
to the portico, and looked up with an air of inquiry. He, too, showed
excitement.

"Balla, I want you to know that if you wish to go, you can do so."

"Hi, Mistis----" began Balla, with an air of reproach; but she cut him
short and kept on.

"I want you all to know it." She was speaking now so as to be heard by
the cook and the maids who were standing about the yard listening to
her. "I want you all to know it--every one on the place! You can go if
you wish; but, if you go, you can never come back!"

"Hi, Mistis," broke in Uncle Balla, "whar is I got to go? I wuz born
on dis place an' I 'spec' to die here, an' be buried right _yonder_;"
and he turned and pointed up to the dark clumps of trees that marked
the graveyard on the hill, a half mile away, where the colored people
were buried. "Dat I does," he affirmed positively. "Y' all sticks by
us, and we'll stick by you."

"I know I ain't gwine nowhar wid no Yankees or nothin'," said Lucy
Ann, in an undertone.

"Dee tell me dee got hoofs and horns," laughed one of the women in the
yard.

The boys' mother started to say something further to Balla, but though
she opened her lips, she did not speak; she turned suddenly and walked
into the house and into her chamber, where she shut the door behind
her. The boys thought she was angry, but when they softly followed her
a few minutes afterward, she got up hastily from where she had been
kneeling beside the bed, and they saw that she had been crying. A
murmur under the window called them back to the portico. It had begun
to grow dark; but a bright spot was glowing on the horizon, and on
this every one's gaze was fixed.

"Where is it, Balla? What is it?" asked the boys' mother, her voice
no longer strained and harsh, but even softer than usual.

"It's the depot, madam. They's burnin' it. That man told me they was
burnin' ev'ywhar they went."

"Will they be here to-night?" asked his mistress.

"No, marm; I don' hardly think they will. That man said they couldn't
travel more than thirty miles a day; but they'll be plenty of 'em here
to-morrow--to breakfast." He gave a nervous sort of laugh.

"Here,--you all come here," said their mistress to the servants. She
went to the smoke-house and unlocked it. "Go in there and get down the
bacon--take a piece, each of you." A great deal was still left.
"Balla, step here." She called him aside and spoke earnestly in an
undertone.

"Yes'm, that's so; that's jes' what I wuz gwine do," the boys heard
him say.

Their mother sent the boys out. She went and locked herself in her
room, but they heard her footsteps as she turned about within, and now
and then they heard her opening and shutting drawers and moving
chairs.

In a little while she came out.

"Frank, you and Willy go and tell Balla to come to the chamber door.
He may be out in the stable."

They dashed out, proud to bear so important a message. They could not
find him, but an hour later they heard him, coming from the stable.
He at once went into the house. They rushed into the chamber, where
they found the door of the closet open.

"Balla, come in here," called their mother from within. "Have you got
them safe?" she asked.

"Yes'm; jes' as safe as they kin be. I want to be 'bout here when they
come, or I'd go down an' stay whar they is."

"What is it?" asked the boys.

"Where is the best place to put that?" she said, pointing to a large,
strong box in which, they knew, the finest silver was kept; indeed,
all excepting what was used every day on the table.

"Well, I declar', Mistis, that's hard to tell," said the old driver,
"without it's in the stable."

"They may burn that down."

"That's so; you might bury it under the floor of the smoke-house?"

"I have heard that they always look for silver there," said the boys'
mother. "How would it do to bury it in the garden?"

"That's the very place I was gwine name," said Balla, with flattering
approval. "They can't burn _that_ down, and if they gwine dig for it
then they'll have to dig a long time before they git over that big
garden." He stooped and lifted up one end of the box to test its
weight.

"I thought of the other end of the flower-bed, between the big
rose-bush and the lilac."

"That's the very place I had in my mind," declared the old man. "They
won' never fine it dyah!"

"We know a good place," said the boys both together; "it's a heap
better than that. It's where we bury our treasures when we play
'Black-beard the Pirate.'"

"Very well," said their mother; "I don't care to know where it is
until after to-morrow, anyhow. I know I can trust you," she added,
addressing Balla.

"Yes'm, you know dat," said he, simply. "I'll jes' go an' git my hoe."

"The garden hasn't got a roof to it, has it, Unc' Balla?" asked Willy,
quietly.

"Go 'way from here, boy," said the old man, making a sweep at him with
his hand. "That boy ain' never done talkin' 'bout that thing yit," he
added, with a pleased laugh, to his mistress.

"And you ain't ever given me all those chickens either," responded
Willy, forgetting his grammar.

"Oh, well, I'm _gwi'_ do it; ain't you hear me say I'm gwine do it?"
he laughed as he went out.

The boys were too excited to get sleepy before the silver was hidden.
Their mother told them they might go down into the garden and help
Balla, on condition that they would not talk.

"That's the way we always do when we bury the treasure. Ain't it,
Willy?" asked Frank.

"If a man speaks, it's death!" declared Willy, slapping his hand on
his side as if to draw a sword, striking a theatrical attitude and
speaking in a deep voice.

"Give the 'galleon' to us," said Frank.

"No; be off with you," said their mother.

"That ain't the way," said Frank. "A pirate never digs the hole until
he has his treasure at hand. To do so would prove him but a novice;
wouldn't it, Willy?"

"Well, I leave it all to you, my little Buccaneers," said their
mother, laughing. "I'll take care of the spoons and forks we use every
day. I'll just hide them away in a hole somewhere."

The boys started off after Balla with a shout, but remembered their
errand and suddenly hushed down to a little squeal of delight at being
actually engaged in burying treasure--real silver. It seemed too good
to be true, and withal there was a real excitement about it, for how
could they know but that some one might watch them from some
hiding-place, or might even fire into them as they worked?

They met the old fellow as he was coming from the carriage-house with
a hoe and a spade in his hands. He was on his way to the garden in a
very straightforward manner, but the boys made him understand that to
bury treasure it was necessary to be particularly secret, and after
some little grumbling, Balla humored them.

The difficulty of getting the box of silver out of the house secretly,
whilst all the family were up, and the servants were moving about, was
so great that this part of the affair had to be carried on in a manner
different from the usual programme of pirates of the first water. Even
the boys had to admit this; and they yielded to old Balla's advice on
this point, but made up for it by additional formality, ceremony, and
secrecy in pointing out the spot where the box was to be hid.

Old Balla was quite accustomed to their games and fun--their "pranks,"
as he called them. He accordingly yielded willingly when they marched
him to a point at the lower end of the yard, on the opposite side from
the garden, and left him. But he was inclined to give trouble when
they both reappeared with a gun, and in a whisper announced that they
must march first up the ditch which ran by the spring around the foot
of the garden.

"Look here, boys; I ain' got time to fool with you chillern," said the
old man. "Ain't you hear your ma tell me she 'pend on me to bury that
silver what yo' gran'ma and gran'pa used to eat off o'--an' don' wan'
nobody to know nothin' 'bout it? An' y' all comin' here with guns,
like you huntin' squ'rr'ls, an' now talkin' 'bout wadin' in the
ditch!"

"But, Unc' Balla, that's the way all buccaneers do," protested Frank.

"Yes, buccaneers always go by water," said Willy.

"And we can stoop in the ditch and come in at the far end of the
garden, so nobody can see us," added Frank.

"Bookanear or bookafar,--I's gwine in dat garden and dig a hole wid my
hoe, an' I is too ole to be wadin' in a ditch like chillern. I got the
misery in my knee now, so bad I'se sca'cely able to stand. I don't
know huccome y' all ain't satisfied with the place you' ma an' I done
pick, anyways."

This was too serious a mutiny for the boys. So it was finally greed
that one gun should be returned to the office, and that they should
enter by the gate, after which Balla was to go with the boys by the
way they should show him, and see the spot they thought of.

They took him down through the weeds around the garden, crouching
under the rose-bushes, and at last stopped at a spot under the slope,
completely surrounded by shrubbery.

"Here is the spot," said Frank in a whisper, pointing under one of the
bushes.

"It's in a line with the longest limb of the big oak-tree by the
gate," added Willy, "and when this locust bush and that cedar grow to
be big trees, it will be just half-way between them."

As this seemed to Balla a very good place, he set to work at once to
dig, the two boys helping him as well as they could. It took a great
deal longer to dig the hole in the dark than they had expected, and
when they got back to the house everything was quiet.

The boys had their hats pulled over their eyes, and had turned their
jackets inside out to disguise themselves.

"It's a first-rate place! Ain't it, Unc' Balla?" they said, as they
entered the chamber where their mother and aunt were waiting for them.

"Do you think it will do, Balla?" their mother asked.

"Oh, yes, madam; it's far enough, an' they got mighty comical ways to
get dyah, wadin' in ditch an' things--it will do. I ain' sho' I kin
fin' it ag'in myself." He was not particularly enthusiastic. Now,
however, he shouldered the box, with a grunt at its weight, and the
party went slowly out through the back door into the dark. The glow of
the burning depot was still visible in the west.

Then it was decided that Willy should go before--he said to
"reconnoitre," Balla said "to open the gate and lead the way,"--and
that Frank should bring up the rear.

They trudged slowly on through the darkness, Frank and Willy watching
on every side, old Balla stooping under the weight of the big box.

After they were some distance in the garden they heard, or thought
they heard, a sound back at the gate, but decided that it was nothing
but the latch clicking; and they went on down to their hiding place.

In a little while the black box was well settled in the hole, and the
dirt was thrown upon it. The replaced earth made something of a mound,
which was unfortunate. They had not thought of this; but they covered
it with leaves, and agreed that it was so well hidden, the Yankees
would never dream of looking there.

"Unc' Balla, where are your horses?" asked one of the boys.

"That's for me to know, an' them to find out what kin," replied the
old fellow with a chuckle of satisfaction.

The whole party crept back out of the garden, and the boys were soon
dreaming of buccaneers and pirates.




CHAPTER IX.


The boys were not sure that they had even fallen asleep when they
heard Lucy Ann call, outside. They turned over to take another nap.
She was coming up to the door. No, for it was a man's step, it must be
Uncle Balla's; they heard horses trampling and people talking. In a
second the door was flung open, and a man strode into the room,
followed by one, two, a half-dozen others, all white and all in
uniform. They were Yankees. The boys were too frightened to speak.
They thought they were arrested for hiding the silver.

"Get up, you lazy little rebels," cried one of the intruders, not
unpleasantly. As the boys were not very quick in obeying, being really
too frightened to do more than sit up in bed, the man caught the
mattress by the end, and lifting it with a jerk emptied them and all
the bedclothes out into the middle of the floor in a heap. At this all
the other men laughed. A minute more and he had drawn his sword. The
boys expected no less than to be immediately killed. They were almost
paralyzed. But instead of plunging his sword into them, the man began
to stick it into the mattresses and to rip them up; while others
pulled open the drawers of the bureau and pitched the things on the
floor.

The boys felt themselves to be in a very exposed and defenceless
condition; and Willy, who had become tangled in the bedclothes, and
had been a little hurt in falling, now that the strain was somewhat
over, began to cry.

In a minute a shadow darkened the doorway and their mother stood in
the room.

"Leave the room instantly!" she cried. "Aren't you ashamed to frighten
children!"

"We haven't hurt the brats," said the man with the sword
good-naturedly.

"Well, you terrify them to death. It's just as bad. Give me those
clothes!" and she sprang forward and snatched the boys' clothes from
the hands of a man who had taken them up. She flung the suits to the
boys, who lost no time in slipping into them.

They had at once recovered their courage in the presence of their
mother. She seemed to them, as she braved the intruders, the grandest
person they had ever seen. Her face was white, but her eyes were like
coals of fire. They were very glad she had never looked or talked so
to them.

When they got outdoors the yard was full of soldiers. They were upon
the porches, in the entry, and in the house. The smoke-house was open
and so were the doors of all the other outhouses, and now and then a
man passed, carrying some article which the boys recognized.

In a little while the soldiers had taken everything they could carry
conveniently, and even things which must have caused them some
inconvenience. They had secured all the bacon that had been left in
the smoke-house, as well as all other eatables they could find. It was
a queer sight, to see the fellows sitting on their horses with a ham
or a pair of fowls tied to one side of the saddle and an engraving or
a package of books, or some ornament, to the other.

A new party of men had by this time come up from the direction of the
stables.

"Old man, come here!" called some of them to Balla, who was standing
near expostulating with the men who were about the fire.

"Who?--me?" asked Balla.

"B'ain't you the carriage driver?"

"Ain't I the keridge driver?"

"Yes, _you_; we know you are, so you need not be lying about it."

"Hi! yes; I the keridge driver. Who say I ain't?"

"Well, where have you hid those horses? Come, we want to know, quick,"
said the fellow roughly, taking out his pistol in a threatening way.

The old man's eyes grew wide. "Hi! befo' de Lord! Marster, how I know
anything of the horses ef they ain't in the stable,--there's where we
keep horses!"

"Here, you come with us. We won't have no foolin' 'bout this," said
his questioner, seizing him by the shoulder and jerking him angrily
around. "If you don't show us pretty quick where those horses are,
we'll put a bullet or two into you. March off there!"

He was backed by a half-a-dozen more, but the pistol, which was at old
Balla's head, was his most efficient ally.

"Hi! Marster, don't pint dat thing at me that way. I ain't ready to
die yit--an' I ain' like dem things, no-ways," protested Balla.

There is no telling how much further his courage could have withstood
their threats, for the boys' mother made her appearance. She was about
to bid Balla show where the horses were, when a party rode into the
yard leading them.

"Hi! there are Bill and John, now," exclaimed the boys, recognizing
the black carriage-horses which were being led along.

"Well, ef dee ain't got 'em, sho' 'nough!" exclaimed the old driver,
forgetting his fear of the cocked pistols.

"Gentlemen, marsters, don't teck my horses, ef you _please_," he
pleaded, pushing through the group that surrounded him, and
approaching the man who led the horses.

They only laughed at him.

[Illustration: "GENTLEMEN, MARSTERS, DON'T TECK MY HORSES, EF YOU
PLEASE," SAID UNCLE BALLA.]

Both the boys ran to their mother, and flinging their arms about her,
burst out crying.

In a few minutes the men started off, riding across the fields; and in
a little while not a soldier was in sight.

"I wish Marse William could see you ridin' 'cross them fields," said
Balla, looking after the retiring troop in futile indignation.

Investigation revealed the fact that every horse and mule on the
plantation had been carried off, except only two or three old mules,
which were evidently considered not worth taking.




CHAPTER X.


After this, times were very hard on the plantation. But the boys'
mother struggled to provide as best she could for the family and
hands. She used to ride all over the county to secure the supplies
which were necessary for their support; one of the boys usually being
her escort and riding behind her on one of the old mules that the
raiders had left. In this way the boys became acquainted with the
roads of the county and even with all the bridle-paths in the
neighborhood of their home. Many of these were dim enough too, running
through stretches of pine forest, across old fields which were little
better than jungle, along gullies, up ditches, and through woods mile
after mile. They were generally useful only to a race, such as the
negroes, which had an instinct for direction like that shown by some
animals but the boys learned to follow them unerringly, and soon
became as skilful in "keepin' de parf" as any night-walker on the
plantation.

As the year passed the times grew harder and harder, and the
expeditions made by the boys' mother became longer and longer, and
more and more frequent.

The meat gave out, and, worst of all, they had no hogs left for next
year. The plantation usually subsisted on bacon; but now there was not
a pig left on the place--unless the old wild sow in the big woods (who
had refused to be "driven up" the fall before) still survived, which
was doubtful; for the most diligent search was made for her without
success, and it was conceded that even she had fallen prey to the
deserters. Nothing was heard of her for months.

One day, in the autumn, the boys were out hunting in the big woods, in
the most distant and wildest part, where they sloped down toward a
little marshy branch that ran into the river a mile or two away.

It was a very dry spell and squirrels were hard to find, owing, the
boys agreed, to the noise made in tramping through the dry leaves.
Finally, they decided to station themselves each at the foot of a
hickory and wait for the squirrels. They found two large hickory trees
not too far apart, and took their positions each on the ground, with
his back to a tree.

It was very dull, waiting, and a half-whispered colloquy was passing
between them as to the advisability of giving it up, when a faint
"cranch, cranch, cranch," sounded in the dry leaves. At first the boys
thought it was a squirrel, and both of them grasped their guns. Then
the sound came again, but this time there appeared to be, not one,
but a number of animals, rustling slowly along.

"What is it?" asked Frank of Willy, whose tree was a little nearer the
direction from which the sound came.

"'Tain't anything but some cows or sheep, I believe," said Willy, in a
disappointed tone. The look of interest died out of Frank's face, but
he still kept his eyes in the direction of the sound, which was now
very distinct. The underbrush, however, was too thick for them to see
anything. At length Willy rose and pushed his way rapidly through the
bushes toward the animals. There was a sudden "oof, oof," and Frank
heard them rushing back down through the woods toward the marsh.

"Somebody's hogs," he muttered, in disgust.

"Frank! Frank!" called Willy, in a most excited tone.

"What?"

"It's the old spotted sow, and she's got a lot of pigs with her--great
big shoats, nearly grown!"

Frank sprang up and ran through the bushes.

"At least six of 'em!"

"Let's follow 'em!"

"All right."

The boys, stooping their heads, struck out through the bushes in the
direction from which the yet retreating animals could still be heard.

"Let's shoot 'em."

"All right."

On they kept as hard as they could. What great news it was! What royal
game!

"It's like hunting wild boars, isn't it?" shouted Willy, joyfully.

They followed the track left by the animals in the leaves kicked up in
their mad flight. It led down over the hill, through the thicket, and
came to an end at the marsh which marked the beginning of the swamp.
Beyond that it could not be traced; but it was evident that the wild
hogs had taken refuge in the impenetrable recesses of the marsh which
was their home.




CHAPTER XI.


After circling the edge of the swamp for some time the boys, as it was
now growing late, turned toward home. They were full of their valuable
discovery, and laid all sorts of plans for the capture of the hogs.
They would not tell even their mother, as they wished to surprise her.
They were, of course, familiar with all the modes of trapping game, as
described in the story books, and they discussed them all. The easiest
way to get the hogs was to shoot them, and this would be the most
"fun"; but it would never do, for the meat would spoil. When they
reached home they hunted up Uncle Balla and told him about their
discovery. He was very much inclined to laugh at them. The hogs they
had seen were nothing, he told them, but some of the neighbors' hogs
which had wandered into the woods.

When the boys went to bed they talked it over once more, and
determined that next day they would thoroughly explore the woods and
the swamp also, as far as they could.

The following afternoon, therefore, they set out, and made immediately
for that part of the woods where they had seen and heard the hogs the
day before. One of them carried a gun and the other a long
jumping-pole. After finding the trail they followed it straight down
to the swamp.

Rolling their trousers up above their knees, they waded boldly in,
selecting an opening between the bushes which looked like a hog-path.
They proceeded slowly, for the briers were so thick in many places
that they could hardly make any progress at all when they neared the
branch. So they turned and worked their way painfully down the stream.
At last, however, they reached a place where the brambles and bushes
seemed to form a perfect wall before them. It was impossible to get
through.

"Let's go home," said Willy. "'Tain't any use to try to get through
there. My legs are scratched all to pieces now."

"Let's try and get out here," said Frank, and he turned from the wall
of brambles. They crept along, springing from hummock to hummock.
Presently they came to a spot where the oozy mud extended at least
eight or ten feet before the next tuft of grass.

"How am I to get the gun across?" asked Willy, dolefully.

"That's a fact! It's too far to throw it, even with the caps off."

At length they concluded to go back for a piece of log they had seen,
and to throw this down so as to lessen the distance.

They pulled the log out of the sand, carried it to the muddy spot, and
threw it into the mud where they wanted it.

Frank stuck his pole down and felt until he had what he thought a
secure hold on it, fixed his eye on the tuft of grass beyond, and
sprang into air.

As he jumped the pole slipped from its insecure support into the miry
mud, and Frank, instead of landing on the hummock for which he had
aimed, lost his direction, and soused flat on his side with a loud
"spa-lash," in the water and mud three feet to the left.

He was a queer object as he staggered to his feet in the quagmire; but
at the instant a loud "oof, oof," came from, the thicket, not a dozen
yards away, and the whole herd of hogs, roused, by his fall, from
slumber in their muddy lair, dashed away through the swamp with "oofs"
of fear.

"There they go, there they go!" shouted both boys, eagerly,--Willy, in
his excitement, splashing across the perilous-looking quagmire, and
finding it not so deep as it had looked.

"There's where they go in and out," exclaimed Frank, pointing to a low
round opening, not more than eighteen inches high, a little further
beyond them, which formed an arch in the almost solid wall of
brambles surrounding the place.

As it was now late they returned home, resolving to wait until the
next afternoon before taking any further steps. There was not a pound
of bacon to be obtained anywhere in the country for love or money, and
the flock of sheep was almost gone.

Their mother's anxiety as to means for keeping her dependents from
starving was so great that the boys were on the point of telling her
what they knew; and when they heard her wishing she had a few hogs to
fatten, they could scarcely keep from letting her know their plans. At
last they had to jump up, and run out of the room.

Next day the boys each hunted up a pair of old boots which they had
used the winter before. The leather was so dry and worn that the boots
hurt their growing feet cruelly, but they brought the boots along to
put on when they reached the swamp. This time, each took a gun, and
they also carried an axe, for now they had determined on a plan for
capturing the hogs.

"I wish we had let Peter and Cole come," said Willy, dolefully,
sitting on the butt end of a log they had cut, and wiping his face on
his sleeve.

"Or had asked Uncle Balla to help us," added Frank.

"They'd be certain to tell all about it."

"Yes; so they would."

They settled down in silence, and panted.

"I tell you what we ought to do! Bait the hog-path, as you would for
fish." This was the suggestion of the angler, Frank.

"With what?"

"Acorns."

The acorns were tolerably plentiful around the roots of the big oaks,
so the boys set to work to pick them up. It was an easier job than
cutting the log, and it was not long before each had his hat full.

As they started down to the swamp, Frank exclaimed, suddenly, "Look
there, Willy!"

Willy looked, and not fifty yards away, with their ends resting on old
stumps, were three or four "hacks," or piles of rails, which had been
mauled the season before and left there, probably having been
forgotten or overlooked.

Willy gave a hurrah, while bending under the weight of a large rail.

At the spot where the hog-path came out of the thicket they commenced
to build their trap.

First they laid a floor of rails; then they built a pen, five or six
rails high, which they strengthened with "outriders." When the pen was
finished, they pried up the side nearest the thicket, from the bottom
rail, about a foot; that is, high enough for the animals to enter.
This they did by means of two rails, using one as a fulcrum and one
as a lever, having shortened them enough to enable the work to be done
from inside the pen.

The lever they pulled down at the farther end until it touched the
bottom of the trap, and fastened it by another rail, a thin one, run
at right-angles to the lever, and across the pen. This would slip
easily when pushed away from the gap, and needed to be moved only
about an inch to slip from the end of the lever and release it; the
weight of the pen would then close the gap. Behind this rail the
acorns were to be thrown; and the hogs, in trying to get the bait,
would push the rail, free the lever or trigger, and the gap would be
closed by the fall of the pen when the lever was released.

It was nearly night when the boys finished.

They scattered a portion of the acorns for bait along the path and up
into the pen, to toll the hogs in. The rest they strewed inside the
pen, beyond their sliding rail.

They could scarcely tear themselves away from the pen; but it was so
late they had to hurry home.

Next day was Sunday. But Monday morning, by daylight, they were up and
went out with their guns, apparently to hunt squirrels. They went,
however, straight to their trap. As they approached they thought they
heard the hogs grunting in the pen. Willy was sure of it; and they ran
as hard as they could. But there were no hogs there. After going every
morning and evening for two weeks, there never had been even an acorn
missed, so they stopped their visits.

Peter and Cole found out about the pen, and then the servants learned
of it, and the boys were joked and laughed at unmercifully.

"I believe them boys is distracted," said old Balla, in the kitchen;
"settin' a pen in them woods for to ketch hogs,--with the gap open!
Think hogs goin' stay in pen with gap open--ef any wuz dyah to went
in!"

"Well, you come out and help us hunt for them," said the boys to the
old driver.

"Go 'way, boy, I ain' got time foolin' wid you chillern, buildin' pen
in swamp. There ain't no hogs in them woods, onless they got in dyah
sence las' fall."

"You saw 'em, didn't you, Willy?" declared Frank.

"Yes, I did."

"Go 'way. Don't you know, ef that old sow had been in them woods, the
boys would have got her up las' fall--an' ef they hadn't, she'd come
up long befo' this?"

"Mister Hall ketch you boys puttin' his hogs up in pen, he'll teck you
up," said Lucy Ann, in her usual teasing way.

This was too much for the boys to stand after all they had done. Uncle
Balla must be right. They would have to admit it. The hogs must have
belonged to some one else. And their mother was in such desperate
straits about meat!

Lucy Ann's last shot, about catching Mr. Hall's hogs, took effect; and
the boys agreed that they would go out some afternoon and pull the pen
down.

The next afternoon they took their guns, and started out on a
squirrel-hunt.

They did not have much luck, however.

"Let's go by there, and pull the old pen down," said Frank, as they
started homeward from the far side of the woods.

"It's out of the way,--let the old thing rip."

"We'd better pull it down. If a hog were to be caught there, it
wouldn't do."

"I wish he would!--but there ain't any hogs going to get caught,"
growled Willy.

"He might starve to death."

This suggestion persuaded Willy, who could not bear to have anything
suffer.

So they sauntered down toward the swamp.

As they approached it, a squirrel ran up a tree, and both boys were
after it in a second. They were standing, one on each side of the
tree, gazing up, trying to get a sight of the little animal among the
gray branches, when a sound came to the ears of both of them at the
same moment.

"What's that?" both asked together.

"It's hogs, grunting."

"No, they are fighting. They are in the swamp. Let's run," said Willy.

"No; we'll scare them away. They may be near the trap," was Frank's
prudent suggestion. "Let's creep up."

"I hear young pigs squealing. Do you think they are ours?"

The squirrel was left, flattened out and trembling on top of a large
limb, and the boys stole down the hill toward the pen. The hogs were
not in sight, though they could be heard grunting and scuffling. They
crept closer. Willy crawled through a thick clump of bushes, and
sprang to his feet with a shout. "We've got 'em! We've got 'em!" he
cried, running toward the pen, followed by Frank.

Sure enough! There they were, fast in the pen, fighting and snorting
to get out, and tearing around with the bristles high on their round
backs, the old sow and seven large young hogs; while a litter of eight
little pigs, as the boys ran up, squeezed through the rails, and,
squealing, dashed away into the grass.

The hogs were almost frantic at the sight of the boys, and rushed
madly at the sides of the pen; but the boys had made it too strong to
be broken.

After gazing at their capture awhile, and piling a few more outriders
on the corners of the pen to make it more secure, the two trappers
rushed home. They dashed breathless and panting into their mother's
room, shouting, "We've got 'em!--we've got 'em!" and, seizing her,
began to dance up and down with her.

In a little while the whole plantation was aware of the capture, and
old Balla was sent out with them to look at the hogs to make sure they
did not belong to some one else,--as he insisted they did. The boys
went with him. It was quite dark when he returned, but as he came in
the proof of the boys' success was written on his face. He was in a
broad grin. To his mistress's inquiry he replied, "Yes'm, they's got
'em, sho' 'nough. They's the beatenes' boys!"

For some time afterward he would every now and then break into a
chuckle of amused content and exclaim, "Them's right smart chillern."
And at Christmas, when the hogs were killed, this was the opinion of
the whole plantation.




CHAPTER XII.


The gibes of Lucy Ann, and the occasional little thrusts of Hugh about
the "deserter business," continued and kept the boys stirred up. At
length they could stand it no longer. It was decided between them that
they must retrieve their reputations by capturing a real deserter and
turning him over to the conscript-officer whose office was at the
depot.

Accordingly, one Saturday they started out on an expedition, the
object of which was to capture a deserter though they should die in
the attempt.

The conscript-guard had been unusually active lately, and it was said
that several deserters had been caught.

The boys turned in at their old road, and made their way into
Holetown. Their guns were loaded with large slugs, and they felt the
ardor of battle thrill them as they marched along down the narrow
roadway. They were trudging on when they were hailed by name from
behind. Turning, they saw their friend Tim Mills, coming along at the
same slouching gait in which he always walked. His old single-barrel
gun was thrown across his arm, and he looked a little rustier than on
the day he had shared their lunch. The boys held a little whispered
conversation, and decided on a treaty of friendship.

"Good-mornin'," he said, on coming up to them. "How's your ma?"

"Good-morning. She's right well."

"What y' all doin'? Huntin' d'serters agin?" he asked.

"Yes. Come on and help us catch them."

"No; I can't do that--exactly;--but I tell you what I _can_ do. I can
tell you whar one is!"

The boys' faces glowed. "All right!"

"Let me see," he began, reflectively, chewing a stick. "Does y' all
know Billy Johnson?"

The boys did not know him.

"You _sure_ you don't know him? He's a tall, long fellow, 'bout forty
years old, and breshes his hair mighty slick; got a big nose, and a
gap-tooth, and a mustache. He lives down in the lower neighborhood."

Even after this description the boys failed to recognize him.

"Well, he's the feller. I can tell you right whar he is, this minute.
He did me a mean trick, an' I'm gwine to give him up. Come along."

"What did he do to you?" inquired the boys, as they followed him down
the road.

"Why--he--; but 't's no use to be rakin' it up agin. You know he
always passes hisself off as one o' the conscrip'-guards,--that's his
dodge. Like as not, that's what he's gwine try and put off on y' all
now; but don't you let him fool you."

"We're not going to," said the boys.

"He rigs hisself up in a uniform--jes' like as not he stole it,
too,--an' goes roun' foolin' people, meckin' out he's such a soldier.
If he fools with me, I'm gwine to finish him!" Here Tim gripped his
gun fiercely.

The boys promised not to be fooled by the wily Johnson. All they asked
was to have him pointed out to them.

"Don't you let him put up any game on you 'bout bein' a
conscrip'-guard hisself," continued their friend.

"No, indeed we won't. We are obliged to you for telling us."

"He ain't so very fur from here. He's mighty tecken up with John
Hall's gal, and is tryin' to meck out like he's Gen'l Lee hisself, an'
she ain't got no mo' sense than to b'lieve him."

"Why, we heard, Mr. Mills, she was going to marry _you_."

"Oh, no, _I_ ain't a good enough soldier for her; she wants to marry
_Gen'l Lee_."

The boys laughed at his dry tone.

As they walked along they consulted how the capture should be made.

"I tell you how to take him," said their companion. "He is a monstrous
coward, and all you got to do is jest to bring your guns down on him.
I wouldn't shoot him--'nless he tried to run; but if he did that, when
he got a little distance I'd pepper him about his legs. Make him give
up his sword and pistol and don't let him ride; 'cause if you do,
he'll git away. Make him walk--the rascal!"

The boys promised to carry out these kindly suggestions.

They soon came in sight of the little house where Mills said the
deserter was. A soldier's horse was standing tied at the gate, with a
sword hung from the saddle. The owner, in full uniform, was sitting on
the porch.

"I can't go any furder," whispered their friend; "but that's
him--that's 'Gen'l Lee'--the triflin' scoundrel!--loafin' 'roun' here
'sted o' goin' in the army! I b'lieve y' all is 'fraid to take him,"
eyeing the boys suspiciously.

"No, we ain't; you'll see," said both boys, fired at the doubt.

"All right; I'm goin' to wait right here and watch you. Go ahead."

The boys looked at the guns to see if they were all right, and marched
up the road keeping their eyes on the enemy. It was agreed that Frank
was to do the talking and give the orders.

They said not a word until they reached the gate. They could see a
young woman moving about in the house, setting a table. At the gate
they stopped, so as to prevent the man from getting to his horse.

The soldier eyed them curiously. "I wonder whose boys they is?" he
said to himself. "They's certainly actin' comical! Playin' soldiers, I
reckon."

"Cock your gun--easy," said Frank, in a low tone, suiting his own
action to the word.

Willy obeyed.

"Come out here, if you please," Frank called to the man. He could not
keep his voice from shaking a little, but the man rose and lounged out
toward them. His prompt compliance reassured them.

They stood, gripping their guns and watching him as he advanced.

"Come outside the gate!" He did as Frank said.

"What do you want?" he asked impatiently.

"You are our prisoner," said Frank, sternly, dropping down his gun
with the muzzle toward the captive, and giving a glance at Willy to
see that he was supported.

"Your _what_? What do you mean?"

"We arrest you as a deserter."

How proud Willy was of Frank!

"Go 'way from here; I ain't no deserter. I'm a-huntin' for deserters,
myself," the man replied, laughing.

Frank smiled at Willy with a nod, as much as to say, "You see,--just
what Tim told us!"

"Ain't your name Mr. Billy Johnson?"

"Yes; that's my name."

"You are the man we're looking for. March down that road. But don't
run,--if you do, we'll shoot you!"

As the boys seemed perfectly serious and the muzzles of both guns were
pointing directly at him, the man began to think that they were in
earnest. But he could hardly credit his senses. A suspicion flashed
into his mind.

"Look here, boys," he said, rather angrily, "I don't want any of your
foolin' with me. I'm too old to play with children. If you all don't
go 'long home and stop giving me impudence, I'll slap you over!" He
started angrily toward Frank. As he did so, Frank brought the gun to
his shoulder.

"Stand back!" he said, looking along the barrel, right into the man's
eyes. "If you move a step, I'll blow your head off!"

The soldier's jaw fell. He stopped and threw up his arm before his
eyes.

"Hold on!" he called, "don't shoot! Boys, ain't you got better sense
'n that?"

"March on down that road. Willy, you get the horse," said Frank,
decidedly.

The soldier glanced over toward the house. The voice of the young
woman was heard singing a war song in a high key.

"Ef Millindy sees me, I'm a goner," he reflected. "Jes' come down the
road a little piece, will you?" he asked, persuasively.

"No talking,--march!" ordered Frank.

He looked at each of the boys; the guns still kept their perilous
direction. The boys' eyes looked fiery to his surprised senses.

"Who is y' all?" he asked.

"We are two little Confederates! That's who we are," said Willy.

"Is any of your parents ever--ever been in a asylum?" he asked, as
calmly as he could.

"That's none of your business," said Captain Frank. "March on!"

The man cast a despairing glance toward the house, where "The years"
were "creeping slowly by, Lorena," in a very high pitch,--and then
moved on.

"I hope she ain't seen nothin'," he thought. "If I jest can git them
guns away from 'em----"

Frank followed close behind him with his old gun held ready for need,
and Willy untied the horse and led it. The bushes concealed them from
the dwelling.

As soon as they were well out of sight of the house, Frank gave the
order:

"Halt!" They all halted.

"Willy, tie the horse." It was done.

"I wonder if those boys is thinkin' 'bout shootin' me?" thought the
soldier, turning and putting his hand on his pistol.

As he did so, Frank's gun came to his shoulder.

"Throw up your hands or you are a dead man." The hands went up.

"Willy, keep your gun on him, while I search him for any weapons."
Willy cocked the old musket and brought it to bear on the prisoner.

"Little boy, don't handle that thing so reckless," the man
expostulated. "Ef that musket was to go off, it might kill me!"

"No talking," demanded Frank, going up to him. "Hold up your hands.
Willy, shoot him if he moves."

Frank drew a long pistol from its holster with an air of business. He
searched carefully, but there was no more.

The fellow gritted his teeth. "If she ever hears of _this_, Tim's got
her certain," he groaned; "but she won't never hear."

At a turn in the road his heart sank within him; for just around the
curve they came upon Tim Mills sitting quietly on a stump. He looked
at them with a quizzical eye, but said not a word.

The prisoner's face was a study when he recognized his rival and
enemy. As Mills did not move, his courage returned.

"Good mornin', Tim," he said, with great politeness.

The man on the stump said nothing; he only looked on with complacent
enjoyment.

"Tim, is these two boys crazy?" he asked slowly.

"They're crazy 'bout shootin' deserters," replied Tim.

"Tim, tell 'em I ain't no deserter." His voice was full of entreaty.

"Well, if you ain't a d'serter, what you doin' outn the army?"

"You know----" began the fellow fiercely; but Tim shifted his long
single-barrel lazily into his hand and looked the man straight in the
eyes, and the prisoner stopped.

"Yes, I know," said Tim with a sudden spark in his eyes. "An' _you_
know," he added after a pause, during which his face resumed its usual
listless look. "An' my edvice to you is to go 'long with them boys, if
you don't want to git three loads of slugs in you. They _may_ put 'em
in you anyway. They's sort of 'stracted 'bout d'serters, and I can
swear to it." He touched his forehead expressively.

"March on!" said Frank.

[Illustration: FRANK AND WILLY CAPTURE A MEMBER OF THE
CONSCRIPT-GUARD.]

The prisoner, grinding his teeth, moved forward, followed by his
guards.

As the enemies parted each man sent the same ugly look after the
other.

"It's all over! He's got her," groaned Johnson. As they passed out of
sight, Mills rose and sauntered somewhat briskly (for him) in the
direction of John Hall's.

They soon reached a little stream, not far from the depot where the
provost-guard was stationed. On its banks the man made his last stand;
but his obstinacy brought a black muzzle close to his head with a
stern little face behind it, and he was fain to march straight through
the water, as he was ordered.

Just as he was emerging on the other bank, with his boots full of
water and his trousers dripping, closely followed by Frank brandishing
a pistol, a small body of soldiers rode up. They were the
conscript-guard. Johnson's look was despairing.

"Why, Billy, what in thunder----? Thought you were sick in bed!"

Another minute and the soldiers took in the situation by instinct--and
Johnson's rage was drowned in the universal explosion of laughter.

The boys had captured a member of the conscript-guard.

In the midst of all, Frank and Willy, overwhelmed by their ridiculous
error, took to their heels as hard as they could, and the last sounds
that reached them were the roars of the soldiers as the scampering
boys disappeared in a cloud of dust.

Johnson went back, in a few days, to see John Hall's daughter; but the
young lady declared she wouldn't marry any man who let two boys make
him wade through a creek; and a month or two later she married Tim
Mills.

To all the gibes he heard on the subject of his capture, and they were
many, Johnson made but one reply:

"Them boys's had parents in a a--sylum, _sure_!"




CHAPTER XIII.


It was now nearing the end of the third year of the war. Hugh was
seventeen, and was eager to go into the army. His mother would have
liked to keep him at home; but she felt that it was her duty not to
withhold anything, and Colonel Marshall offered Hugh a place with him.
So a horse was bought, and Hugh went to Richmond and came back with a
uniform and a sabre. The boys truly thought that General Lee himself
was not so imposing or so great a soldier as Hugh. They followed him
about like two pet dogs, and when he sat down they stood and gazed at
him adoringly.

When Hugh rode away to the army it was harder to part with him than
they had expected; and though he had left them his gun and dog, to
console them during his absence, it was difficult to keep from crying.
Everyone on the plantation was moved. Uncle Balla, who up to the last
moment had been very lively attending to the horse, as the young
soldier galloped away sank down on the end of the steps of the office,
and, dropping his hands on his knees, followed Hugh with his eyes
until he disappeared over the hill. The old driver said nothing, but
his face expressed a great deal.

The boys' mother cried a great deal, but it was generally when she was
by herself.

"She's afraid Hugh'll be kilt," Willy said to Uncle Balla, in
explanation of her tears,--the old servant having remarked that he
"b'lieved she cried more when Hugh went away, than she did when Marse
John and Marse William both went."

"Hi! warn't she 'fred they'll be kilt, too?" he asked in some scorn.

This was beyond Willy's logic, so he pondered over it.

"Yes, but she's afraid Hugh'll be kilt, as _well_ as them," he said
finally, as the best solution of the problem.

It did not seem to wholly satisfy Uncle Balla's mind, for when he
moved off he said, as though talking to himself:

"She sutn'ey is 'sot' on that boy. He'll be a gen'l hisself, the first
thing she know."

There was a bond of sympathy between Uncle Balla and his mistress
which did not exist so strongly between her and any of the other
servants. It was due perhaps to the fact that he was the companion and
friend of her boys.

That winter the place where the army went into winter quarters was
some distance from Oakland; but the young officers used to ride over,
from time to time, two or three together, and stay for a day or two.

Times were harder than they had been before, but the young people were
as gay as ever.

The colonel, who had been dreadfully wounded in the summer, had been
made a brigadier-general for gallantry. Hugh had received a slight
wound in the same action. The General had written to the boy's mother
about him; but he had not been home. The General had gone back to his
command. He had never been to Oakland since he was wounded.

One evening, the boys had just teased their Cousin Belle into reading
them their nightly portion of "The Talisman," as they sat before a
bright lightwood fire, when two horsemen galloped up to the gate,
their horses splashed with mud from fetlocks to ears. In a second,
Lucy Ann dashed headlong into the room, with her teeth gleaming:

"Here Marse Hugh, out here!"

There was a scamper to the door--the boys first, shouting at the tops
of their voices, Cousin Belle next, and Lucy Ann close at her heels.

"Who's with him, Lucy Ann?" asked Miss Belle, as they reached the
passage-way, and heard several voices outside.

"The Cunel's with 'im."

The young lady turned and fled up the steps as fast as she could.

"You see I brought my welcome with me," said the General, addressing
the boy's mother, and laying his hand on his young aide's shoulder, as
they stood, a little later, "thawing out" by the roaring log-fire in
the sitting-room.

"You always bring that; but you are doubly welcome for bringing this
young soldier back to me," said she, putting her arm affectionately
around her son.

Just then the boys came rushing in from taking the horses to the
stable. They made a dive toward the fire to warm their little chapped
hands.

"I told you Hugh warn't as tall as the General," said Frank, across
the hearth to Willy.

"Who said he was?"

"You!"

"I didn't."

"You did."

They were a contradictory pair of youngsters, and their voices,
pitched in a youthful treble, were apt in discussion to strike a
somewhat higher key; but it did not follow that they were in an
ill-humor merely because they contradicted each other.

"What _did_ you say, if you didn't say that?" insisted Frank.

"I said he _looked_ as if he _thought_ himself as tall as the
General," declared Willy, defiantly, oblivious in his excitement of
the eldest brother's presence. There was a general laugh at Hugh's
confusion; but Hugh had carried an order across a field under a hot
fire, and had brought a regiment up in the nick of time, riding by its
colonel's side in a charge which had changed the issue of the fight,
and had a sabre wound in the arm to show for it. He could therefore
afford to pass over such an accusation with a little tweak of Willy's
ear.

"Where's Cousin Belle?" asked Frank.

"I s'peck she's putting on her fine clothes for the General to see.
Didn't she run when she heard he was here!"

"Willy!" said his mother, reprovingly.

"Well, she did, Ma."

His mother shook her head at him; but the General put his hand on the
boy, and drew him closer.

"You say she ran?" he asked, with a pleasant light in his eyes.

"Yes, sirree; she did _that_."

Just then the door opened, and their Cousin Belle entered the room.
She looked perfectly beautiful. The greetings were very cordial--to
Hugh especially. She threw her arms around his neck, and kissed him.

"You young hero!" she cried. "Oh, Hugh, I am so proud of
you!"--kissing him again, and laughing at him, with her face glowing,
and her big brown eyes full of light. "Where were you wounded? Oh! I
was so frightened when I heard about it!"

"Where was it? Show it to us, Hugh; please do," exclaimed both boys at
once, jumping around him, and pulling at his arm.

"Oh, Hugh, is it still very painful?" asked his cousin, her pretty
face filled with sudden sympathy.

"Oh! no, it was nothing--nothing but a scratch," said Hugh, shaking
the boys off, his expression being divided between feigned
indifference and sheepishness, at this praise in the presence of his
chief.

"No such thing, Miss Belle," put in the General, glad of the chance to
secure her commendation. "It might have been very serious, and it was
a splendid ride he made."

"Were you not ashamed of yourself to send him into such danger?" she
said, turning on him suddenly. "Why did you not go yourself?"

The young man laughed. Her beauty entranced him. He had scars enough
to justify him in keeping silence under her pretended reproach.

"Well, you see, I couldn't leave the place where I was. I had to send
some one, and I knew Hugh would do it. He led the regiment after the
colonel and major fell--and he did it splendidly, too."

There was a chorus from the young lady and the boys together.

"Oh, Hugh, you hear what he says!" exclaimed the former, turning to
her cousin. "Oh, I am so glad that he thinks so!" Then, recollecting
that she was paying him the highest compliment, she suddenly began to
blush, and turned once more to him. "Well, you talk as if you were
surprised. Did you expect anything else?"

There was a fine scorn in her voice, if it had been real.

"Certainly not; you are all too clever at making an attack," he said
coolly, looking her in the eyes. "But I have heard even of _your_
running away," he added, with a twinkle in his eyes.

"When?" she asked quickly, with a little guilty color deepening in her
face as she glanced at the boys. "I never did."

"Oh, she did!" exclaimed both boys in a breath, breaking in, now that
the conversation was within their range. "You ought to have seen her.
She just _flew_!" exclaimed Frank.

The girl made a rush at the offender to stop him.

"He doesn't know what he is talking about," she said, roguishly, over
her shoulder.

"Yes, he does," called the other. "She was standing at the foot of the
steps when you all came, and--oo--oo--oo--" the rest was lost as his
cousin placed her hand close over his mouth.

"Here! here! run away! You are too dangerous. They don't know what
they are talking about," she said, throwing a glance toward the young
officer, who was keenly enjoying her confusion. Her hand slipped from
Willy's mouth and he went on. "And when she heard it was you, she just
clapped her hands and ran--oo--oo--umm."

"Here, Hugh, put them out," she said to that young man, who, glad to
do her bidding, seized both miscreants by their arms and carried them
out, closing the door after them.

Hugh bore the boys into the dining-room, where he kept them, until
supper-time.

After supper, the rest of the family dispersed, and the boys' mother
invited them to come with her and Hugh to her own room, though they
were eager to go and see the General, and were much troubled lest he
should think their mother was rude in leaving him.




CHAPTER XIV.


The next day was Sunday. The General and Hugh had but one day to stay.
They were to leave at daybreak the following morning. They thoroughly
enjoyed their holiday; at least the boys knew that Hugh did. They had
never known him so affable with them. They did not see much of the
General, after breakfast. He seemed to like to stay "stuck up in the
house" all the time, talking to Cousin Belle; the boys thought this
due to his lameness. Something had occurred, the boys didn't
understand just what; but the General was on an entirely new footing
with all of them, and their Cousin Belle was in some way concerned in
the change. She did not any longer run from the General, and it seemed
to them as though everyone acted as if he belonged to her. The boys
did not altogether like the state of affairs. That afternoon, however,
he and their Cousin Belle let the boys go out walking with them, and
he was just as hearty as he could be; he made them tell him all about
capturing the deserter, and about catching the hogs, and everything
they did. They told him all about their "Robbers' Cave," down in the
woods near where an old house had stood. It was between two ravines
near a spring they had found. They had fixed up the "cave" with boards
and old pieces of carpet "and everything," and they told him, as a
secret, how to get to it through the pines without leaving a trail. He
had to give the holy pledge of the "Brotherhood" before this could be
divulged to him; but he took it with a solemnity which made the boys
almost forgive the presence of their Cousin Belle. It was a little
awkward at first that she was present; but as the "Constitution"
provided only as to admitting men to the mystic knowledge, saying
nothing about women, this difficulty was, on the General's suggestion,
passed over, and the boys fully explained the location of the spot,
and how to get there by turning off abruptly from the path through the
big woods right at the pine thicket,--and all the rest of the way.

"'Tain't a 'sure-enough' cave," explained Willy; "but it's 'most as
good as one. The old rock fire-place is just like a cave."

"The gullies are so deep you can't get there except that one way,"
declared Frank.

"Even the Yankees couldn't find you there," asserted Willy.

"I don't believe anybody could, after that; but I trust they will
never have to try," laughed their Cousin Belle, with an anxious look
in her bright eyes at the mere thought.

That night they were at supper, about eight o'clock, when something
out-of-doors attracted the attention of the party around the table. It
was a noise,--a something indefinable, but the talk and mirth stopped
suddenly, and everybody listened.

There was a call, and the hurried steps of some one running, just
outside the door, and Lucy Ann burst into the room, her face ashy
pale.

"The yard's full o' mens--Yankees," she gasped, just as the General
and Hugh rose from the table.

"How many are there?" asked both gentlemen.

"They's all 'roun' the house ev'y which a-way."

The General looked at his sweetheart. She came to his side with a cry.

"Go up stairs to the top of the house," called the boys' mother.

"We can hide you; come with us," said the boys.

"Go up the back way, Frank 'n' Willy, to you-all's den," whispered
Lucy Ann.

"That's where we are going," said the boys as she went out.

"You all come on!" This to the General and Hugh.

"The rest of you take your seats," said the boys' mother.

All this had occupied only a few seconds. The soldiers followed the
boys out by a side-door and dashed up the narrow stairs to the
second-story just as a thundering knocking came at the front door. It
was as dark as pitch, for candles were too scarce to burn more than
one at a time.

"You run back," said Hugh to the boys, as they groped along. "There
are too many of us. I know the way."

But it was too late; the noise down stairs told that the enemy was
already in the house!

As the soldiers left the supper-room, the boys' mother had hastily
removed two plates from the places and set two chairs back against the
wall; she made the rest fill up the spaces, so that there was nothing
to show that the two men had been there.

She had hardly taken her seat again, when the sound of heavy footsteps
at the door announced the approach of the enemy. She herself rose and
went to the door; but it was thrown open before she reached it and an
officer in full Federal uniform strode in, followed by several men.

The commander was a tall young fellow, not older than the General. The
lady started back somewhat startled, and there was a confused chorus
of exclamations of alarm from the rest of those at the table. The
officer, finding himself in the presence of ladies, removed his cap
with a polite bow.

"I hope, madam, that you ladies will not be alarmed," he said. "You
need be under no apprehension, I assure you." Even while speaking, his
eye had taken a hasty survey of the room.

"We desire to see General Marshall, who is at present in this house
and I am sorry to have to include your son in my requisition. We know
that they are here, and if they are given us, I promise you that
nothing shall be disturbed."

"You appear to be so well instructed that I can add little to your
information," said the mistress of the house, haughtily. "I am glad to
say, however, that I hardly think you will find them."

"Madam, I know they are here," said the young soldier positively, but
with great politeness. "I have positive information to that effect.
They arrived last evening and have not left since. Their horses are
still in the stable. I am sorry to be forced to do violence to my
feelings, but I must search the house. Come, men."

"I doubt not you have found their horses," began the lady, but she was
interrupted by Lucy Ann, who entered at the moment with a plate of
fresh corn-cakes, and caught the last part of the sentence.

"Come along, Mister," she said, "I'll show you myself," and she set
down her plate, took the candle from the table, and walked to the
door, followed by the soldiers.

"Lucy Ann!" exclaimed her mistress; but she was too much amazed at the
girl's conduct to say more.

"I know whar dey is!" Lucy Ann continued, taking no notice of her
mistress. They heard her say, as she was shutting the door, "Y' all
come with me; I 'feared they gone; ef they ain't, I know whar they
is!"

"Open every room," said the officer.

"Oh, yes, sir; I gwine ketch 'em for you," she said, eagerly opening
first one door, and then the other, "that is, ef they ain' gone. I
mighty 'feared they gone. I seen 'em goin' out the back way about a
little while befo' you all come,--but I thought they might 'a' come
back. Mister, ken y' all teck me 'long with you when you go?" she
asked the officer, in a low voice. "I want to be free."

"I don't know; we can some other time, if not now. We are going to set
you all free."

"Oh, glory! Come 'long, Mister; let's ketch 'em. They ain't heah, but
I know whar dey is."

The soldiers closely examined every place where it was possible a man
could be concealed, until they had been over all the lower part of the
house.

Lucy Ann stopped. "Dey's gone!" she said positively.

The officer motioned to her to go up stairs.

"Yes, sir, I wuz jes' goin' tell you we jes' well look up-stairs,
too," she said, leading the way, talking all the time, and shading the
flickering candle with her hand.

The little group, flat on the floor against the wall in their dark
retreat, could now hear her voice distinctly. She was speaking in a
confidential undertone, as if afraid of being overheard.

"I wonder I didn't have sense to get somebody to watch 'em when they
went out," they heard her say.

"She's betrayed us!" whispered Hugh.

The General merely said, "Hush," and laid his hand firmly on the
nearest boy to keep him still. Lucy Ann led the soldiers into the
various chambers one after another. At last she opened the next room,
and, through the wall, the men in hiding heard the soldiers go in and
walk about.

They estimated that there were at least half-a-dozen.

"Isn't there a garret?" asked one of the searching party.

"Nor, sir, 'tain't no garret, jes' a loft; but they ain't up there,"
said Lucy Ann's voice.

"We'll look for ourselves." They came out of the room. "Show us the
way."

"Look here, if you tell us a lie, we'll hang you!"

The voice of the officer was very stern.

"I ain' gwine tell you no lie, Mister. What you reckon I wan' tell you
lie for? Dey ain' in the garret, I know,----Mister, please don't
p'int dem things at me. I's 'feared o' dem things," said the girl in a
slightly whimpering voice; "I gwine show you."

She came straight down the passage toward the recess where the
fugitives were huddled, the men after her, their heavy steps echoing
through the house. The boys were trembling violently. The light, as
the searchers came nearer, fell on the wall, crept along it, until it
lighted up the whole alcove, except where they lay. The boys held
their breath. They could hear their hearts thumping.

Lucy Ann stepped into the recess with her candle, and looked straight
at them.

"They ain't in here," she exclaimed, suddenly putting her hand up
before the flame, as if to prevent it flaring, thus throwing the
alcove once more into darkness. "The trap-door to the garret's 'roun'
that a-way," she said to the soldiers, still keeping her position at
the narrow entrance, as if to let them pass. When they had all passed,
she followed them.

The boys began to wriggle with delight, but the General's strong hand
kept them still.

Naturally, the search in the garret proved fruitless, and the
hiding-party heard the squad swearing over their ill-luck as they came
back; while Lucy Ann loudly lamented not having sent some one to
follow the fugitives, and made a number of suggestions as to where
they had gone, and the probability of catching them if the soldiers
went at once in pursuit.

"Did you look in here?" asked a soldier, approaching the alcove.

"Yes, sir; they ain't in there." She snuffed the candle out suddenly
with her fingers. "Oh, oh!--my light done gone out! Mind! Let me go in
front and show you the way," she said; and, pressing before, she once
more led them along the passage.

"Mind yo' steps; ken you see?" she asked.

They went down stairs, while Lucy Ann gave them minute directions as
to how they might catch "Marse Hugh an' the Gen'l" at a certain place
a half-mile from the house (an unoccupied quarter), which she
carefully described.

A further investigation ensued downstairs, but in a little while the
searchers went out of the house. Their tone had changed since their
disappointment, and loud threats floated up the dark stairway to the
prisoners still crouching in the little recess.

In a few minutes the boys' Cousin Belle came rushing up stairs.

"Now's your time! Come quick," she called; "they will be back
directly. Isn't she an angel!" The whole party sprang to their feet,
and ran down to the lower floor.

"Oh, we were so frightened!" "Don't let them see you." "Make haste,"
were the exclamations that greeted them as the two soldiers said their
good-byes and prepared to leave the house.

"Go out by the side-door; that's your only chance. It's pitch-dark,
and the bushes will hide you. But where are you going?"

"We are going to the boys' cave," said the General, buckling on his
pistol; "I know the way, and we'll get away as soon as these fellows
leave, if we cannot before."

"God bless you!" said the ladies, pushing them away in dread of the
enemy's return.

"Come on, General," called Hugh in an undertone. The General was
lagging behind a minute to say good-bye once more. He stooped suddenly
and kissed the boys' Cousin Belle before them all.

"Good-bye. God bless you!" and he followed Hugh out of the window into
the darkness. The girl burst into tears and ran up to her room.

A few seconds afterward the house was once more filled with the enemy,
growling at their ill-luck in having so narrowly missed the prize.

"We'll catch 'em yet," said the leader.




CHAPTER XV.


The raiders were up early next morning scouring the woods and country
around. They knew that the fugitive soldiers could not have gone far,
for the Federals had every road picketed, and their main body was not
far away. As the morning wore on, it became a grave question at
Oakland how the two soldiers were to subsist. They had no provisions
with them, and the roads were so closely watched that there was no
chance of their obtaining any. The matter was talked over, and the
boys' mother and Cousin Belle were in despair.

"They can eat their shoes," said Willy, reflectively.

The ladies exclaimed in horror.

"That's what men always do when they get lost in a wilderness where
there is no game."

This piece of information from Willy did not impress his hearers as
much as he supposed it would.

"I'll tell you! Let me and Frank go and carry 'em something to eat!"

"How do you know where they are?"

"They are at our Robber's Cave, aren't they, Cousin Belle? We told
the General yesterday how to get there, didn't we?"

"Yes, and he said last night that he would go there."

Willy's idea seemed a good one, and the offer was accepted. The boys
were to go out as if to see the troops, and were to take as much food
as they thought could pass for their luncheon. Their mother cooked and
put up a luncheon large enough to have satisfied the appetites of two
young Brobdingnagians, and they set out on their relief expedition.

The two sturdy little figures looked full of importance as they strode
off up the road. They carried many loving messages. Their Cousin Belle
gave to each separately a long whispered message which each by himself
was to deliver to the General. It was thought best not to hazard a
note.

They were watched by the ladies from the portico until they
disappeared over the hill. They took a path which led into the woods,
and walked cautiously for fear some of the raiders might be lurking
about. However, the boys saw none of the enemy, and in a little while
they came to a point where the pines began. Then they turned into the
woods, for the pines were so thick the boys could not be seen, and the
pine tags made it so soft under foot that they could walk without
making any noise.

They were pushing their way through the bushes, when Frank suddenly
stopped.

"Hush!" he said.

Willy halted and listened.

"There they are."

From a little distance to one side, in the direction of the path they
had just left, they heard the trampling of a number of horses' feet.

"That's not our men," said Willy. "Hugh and the General haven't any
horses."

"No; that's the Yankees," said Frank. "Let's lie down. They may hear
us."

The boys flung themselves upon the ground and almost held their breath
until the horses had passed out of hearing.

"Do you reckon they are hunting for us?" asked Willy in an awed
whisper.

"No, for Hugh and the General. Come on."

They rose, went tipping a little deeper into the pines, and again made
their way toward the cave.

"Maybe they've caught 'em," suggested Willy.

"They can't catch 'em in these pines," replied Frank. "You can't see
any distance at all. A horse can't get through, and the General and
Hugh could shoot 'em, and then get away before they could catch 'em."

They hurried on.

"Frank, suppose they take us for Yankees?"

Evidently Willy's mind had been busy since Frank's last speech.

"They aren't going to shoot _us_," said Frank; but it was an
unpleasant suggestion, for they were not very far from the dense clump
of pines between two gullies, which the boys called their cave.

"We can whistle," he said, presently.

"Won't Hugh and the General think we are enemies trying to surround
them?" Willy objected. The dilemma was a serious one. "We'll have to
crawl up," said Frank, after a pause.

And this was agreed upon. They were soon on the edge of the deep gully
which, on one side, protected the spot from all approach. They
scrambled down its steep side and began to creep along, peeping over
its other edge from time to time, to see if they could discover the
clearing which marked the little green spot on top of the hill, where
once had stood an old cabin. The base of the ruined chimney, with its
immense fire-place, constituted the boys' "cave." They were close to
it, now, and felt themselves to be in imminent danger of a sweeping
fusillade. They had just crept up to the top of the ravine and were
consulting, when some one immediately behind them, not twenty feet
away, called out:

"Hello! What are you boys doing here? Are you trying to capture us?"

They jumped at the unexpected voice. The General broke into a laugh.
He had been sitting on the ground on the other side of the declivity,
and had been watching their manoeuvres for some time.

He brought them to the house-spot where Hugh was asleep on the ground;
he had been on watch all the morning, and, during the General's turn,
was making up for his lost sleep. He was soon wide awake enough, and
he and the General, with appetites bearing witness to their long fast,
were without delay engaged in disposing of the provisions which the
boys had brought.

The boys were delighted with the mystery of their surroundings. Each
in turn took the General aside and held a long interview with him, and
gave him all their Cousin Belle's messages. No one had ever treated
them with such consideration as the General showed them. The two men
asked the boys all about the dispositions of the enemy, but the boys
had little to tell.

"They are after us pretty hotly," said the General. "I think they are
going away shortly. It's nothing but a raid, and they are moving on.
We must get back to camp to-night."

"How are you going?" asked the boys. "You haven't any horses."

"We are going to get some of their horses," said the officer. "They
have taken ours--now they must furnish us with others."

It was about time for the boys to start for home. The General took
each of them aside, and talked for a long time. He was speaking to
Willy, on the edge of the clearing, when there was a crack of a twig
in the pines. In a second he had laid the boy on his back in the soft
grass and whipped out a pistol. Then, with a low, quick call to Hugh,
he sprang swiftly into the pines toward the sound.

"Crawl down into the ravine, boys," called Hugh, following his
companion. The boys rolled down over the bank like little ground-hogs;
but in a second they heard a familiar drawling voice call out in a
subdued tone:

"Hold on, Cunnel! it's nobody but me; don't you know me?" And, in a
moment, they heard the General's astonished and somewhat stern reply:

"Mills, what are you doing here? Who's with you? What do you want?"

"Well," said the new-comer, slowly, "I 'lowed I'd come to see if I
could be o' any use to you. I heard the Yankees had run you 'way from
Oakland last night, and was sort o' huntin' for you. Fact is, they's
been up my way, and I sort o' 'lowed I'd come an' see ef I could help
you git back to camp."

"Where have you been all this time? I wonder you are not ashamed to
look me in the face!"

The General's voice was still stern. He had turned around and walked
back to the cleared space.

The deserter scratched his head in perplexity.

"I needn' 'a' come," he said, doggedly. "Where's them boys? I don'
want the boys hurted. I seen 'em comin' here, an' I jes' followed 'em
to see they didn't get in no trouble. But----"

This speech about the boys effected what the offer of personal service
to the General himself had failed to bring about.

"Sit down and let me talk to you," said the General, throwing himself
on the grass.

Mills seated himself cross-legged near the officer, with his gun
across his knees, and began to bite a straw which he pulled from a
tuft by his side.

The boys had come up out of their retreat, and taken places on each
side of the General.

"You all take to grass like young partridges," said the hunter. The
boys were flattered, for they considered any notice from him a
compliment.

"What made you fool us, and send us to catch that conscript-guard?"
Frank asked.

"Well, you ketched him, didn't you? You're the only ones ever been
able to ketch him," he said, with a low chuckle.

"Now, Mills, you know how things stand," said the General. "It's a
shame for you to have been acting this way. You know what people say
about you. But if you come back to camp and do your duty, I'll have it
all straightened out. If you don't, I'll have you shot."

His voice was as calm and his manner as composed as if he were
promising the man opposite him a reward for good conduct. He looked
Mills steadily in the eyes all the time. The boys felt as if their
friend were about to be executed. The General seemed an immeasurable
distance above them.

The deserter blinked twice or thrice, slowly bit his shred of straw,
looked casually first toward one boy and then toward the other, but
without the slightest change of expression in his face.

"Cun'l," he said, at length, "I ain't no deserter. I ain't feared of
bein' shot. Ef I was, I wouldn' 'a' come here now. I'm gwine wid you,
an' I'm gwine back to my company; an' I'm gwine fight, ef Yankees gits
in my way; but ef I gits tired, I's comin' home; an' 'tain't no use to
tell you I ain't, 'cause I _is_,--an' ef anybody flings up to me that
I's a-runnin' away, I'm gwine to kill 'em!"

He rose to his feet in the intensity of his feeling, and his eyes,
usually so dull, were like live coals.

The General looked at him quietly a few seconds, then himself arose
and laid his hand on Tim Mills' shoulder.

"All right," he said.

"I got a little snack M'lindy put up," said Mills, pulling a
substantial bundle out of his game-bag. "I 'lowed maybe you might be
sort o' hongry. Jes' two or three squirrels I shot," he said,
apologetically.

"You boys better git 'long home, I reckon," said Mills to Willy. "You
ain' 'fraid, is you? 'Cause if you is, I'll go with you."

His voice had resumed its customary drawl.

"Oh, no," said both boys, eagerly. "We aren't afraid."

"An' tell your ma I ain' let nobody tetch nothin' on the Oakland
plantation; not sence that day you all went huntin' deserters; not if
I knowed 'bout it."

"Yes, sir."

"An' tell her I'm gwine take good keer o' Hugh an' the Cunnel.
Good-bye!--now run along!"

"All right, sir,--good-bye."

"An' ef you hear anybody say Tim Mills is a d'serter, tell 'em it's a
lie, an' you know it. Good-bye." He turned away as if relieved.

The boys said good-bye to all three, and started in the direction of
home.




CHAPTER XVI.


After crossing the gully, and walking on through the woods for what
they thought a safe distance, they turned into the path.

They were talking very merrily about the General and Hugh and their
friend Mills, and were discussing some romantic plan for the recapture
of their horses from the enemy, when they came out of the path into
the road, and found themselves within twenty yards of a group of
Federal soldiers, quietly sitting on their horses, evidently guarding
the road.

The sight of the blue-coats made the boys jump. They would have crept
back, but it was too late--they caught the eye of the man nearest
them. They ceased talking as suddenly as birds in the trees stop
chirruping when the hawk sails over; and when one Yankee called to
them, in a stern tone, "Halt there!" and started to come toward them,
their hearts were in their mouths.

"Where are you boys going?" he asked, as he came up to them.

"Going home."

"Where do you belong?"

"Over there--at Oakland," pointing in the direction of their home,
which seemed suddenly to have moved a thousand miles aways.

"Where have you been?" The other soldiers had come up now.

"Been down this way." The boys' voices were never so meek before. Each
reply was like an apology.

"Been to see your brother?" asked one who had not spoken before--a
pleasant-looking fellow. The boys looked at him. They were paralyzed
by dread of the approaching question.

"Now, boys, we know where you have been," said a small fellow, who
wore a yellow chevron on his arm. He had a thin moustache and a sharp
nose, and rode a wiry, dull sorrel horse. "You may just as well tell
us all about it. We know you've been to see 'em, and we are going to
make you carry us where they are."

"No, we ain't," said Frank, doggedly.

Willy expressed his determination also.

"If you don't it's going to be pretty bad for you," said the little
corporal. He gave an order to two of the men, who sprang from their
horses, and, catching Frank, swung him up behind another cavalryman.
The boy's face was very pale, but he bit his lip.

"Go ahead," continued the corporal to a number of his men, who started
down the path. "You four men remain here till we come back," he said
to the men on the ground, and to two others on horseback. "Keep him
here," jerking his thumb toward Willy, whose face was already burning
with emotion.

"I'm going with Frank," said Willy. "Let me go." This to the man who
had hold of him by the arm. "Frank, make him let me go," he shouted,
bursting into tears, and turning on his captor with all his little
might.

"Willy, he's not goin' to hurt you,--don't you tell!" called Frank,
squirming until he dug his heels so into the horse's flanks that the
horse began to kick up.

"Keep quiet, Johnny; he's not goin' to hurt him," said one of the men,
kindly. He had a brown beard and shining white teeth.

They rode slowly down the narrow path, the dragoon holding Frank by
the leg. Deep down in the woods, beyond a small branch, the path
forked.

"Which way?" asked the corporal, stopping and addressing Frank.

Frank set his mouth tight and looked him in the eyes.

"Which is it?" the corporal repeated.

"I ain't going to tell," said he, firmly.

"Look here, Johnny; we've got you, and we are going to make you tell
us; so you might just as well do it, easy. If you don't, we're goin'
to make you."

The boy said nothing.

[Illustration: THE BOY FACED HIS CAPTOR, WHO HELD A STRAP IN ONE
HAND.]

"You men dismount. Stubbs, hold the horses." He himself dismounted,
and three others did the same, giving their horses to a fourth.

"Get down!"--this to Frank and the soldier behind whom he was riding.
The soldier dismounted, and the boy slipped off after him and faced
his captor, who held a strap in one hand.

"Are you goin' to tell us?" he asked.

"No."

"Don't you know?" He came a step nearer, and held the strap forward.
There was a long silence. The boy's face paled perceptibly, but took
on a look as if the proceedings were indifferent to him.

"If you say you don't know"--said the man, hesitating in face of the
boy's resolution. "Don't you know where they are?"

"Yes, I know; but I ain't goin' to tell you," said Frank, bursting
into tears.

"The little Johnny's game," said the soldier who had told him the
others were not going to hurt Willy. The corporal said something to
this man in an undertone, to which he replied:

"You can try, but it isn't going to do any good. I don't half like it,
anyway."

Frank had stopped crying after his first outburst.

"If you don't tell, we are going to shoot you," said the little
soldier, drawing his pistol.

The boy shut his mouth close, and looked straight at the corporal. The
man laid down his pistol, and, seizing Frank, drew his hands behind
him, and tied them.

"Get ready, men," he said, as he drew the boy aside to a small tree,
putting him with his back to it.

Frank thought his hour had come. He thought of his mother and Willy,
and wondered if the soldiers would shoot Willy, too. His face twitched
and grew ghastly white. Then he thought of his father, and of how
proud he would be of his son's bravery when he should hear of it. This
gave him strength.

"The knot--hurts my hands," he said.

The man leaned over and eased it a little.

"I wasn't crying because I was scared," said Frank.

The kind looking fellow turned away.

"Now, boys, get ready," said the corporal, taking up his pistol.

How large it looked to Frank. He wondered where the bullets would hit
him, and if the wounds would bleed, and whether he would be left alone
all night out there in the woods, and if his mother would come and
kiss him.

"I want to say my prayers," he said, faintly.

The soldier made some reply which he could not hear, and the man with
the beard started forward; but just then all grew dark before his
eyes.

Next, he thought he must have been shot, for he felt wet about his
face, and was lying down. He heard some one say, "He's coming to," and
another replied, "Thank God!"

He opened his eyes. He was lying beside the little branch with his
head in the lap of the big soldier with the beard, and the little
corporal was leaning over him throwing water in his face from a cap.
The others were standing around.

"What's the matter?" asked Frank.

"That's all right," said the little corporal, kindly. "We were just
a-foolin' a bit with you, Johnny."

"We never meant to hurt you," said the other. "You feel better now?"

"Yes, where's Willy?" He was too tired to move.

"He's all right. We'll take you to him."

"Am I shot?" asked Frank.

"No! Do you think we'd have touched a hair of your head--and you such
a brave little fellow? We were just trying to scare you a bit and
carried it too far, and you got a little faint,--that's all."

The voice was so kindly that Frank was encouraged to sit up.

"Can you walk now?" asked the corporal, helping him and steadying him
as he rose to his feet.

"I'll take him," said the big fellow, and before the boy could move,
he had stooped, taken Frank in his arms, and was carrying him back
toward the place where they had left Willy, while the others followed
after with the horses.

"I can walk," said Frank.

"No, I'll carry you, b-bless your heart!"

The boy did not know that the big dragoon was looking down at the
light hair resting on his arm, and that while he trod the Virginia
wood-path, in fancy he was home in Delaware; or that the pressure the
boy felt from his strong arms, was a caress given for the sake of
another boy far away on the Brandywine. A little while before they
came in sight Frank asked to be put down.

The soldier gently set him on his feet, and before he let him go
kissed him.

"I've got a curly-headed fellow at home, just the size of you," he
said softly.

Frank saw that his eyes were moist. "I hope you'll get safe back to
him," he said.

"God grant it!" said the soldier.

When they reached the squad at the gate, they found Willy still in
much distress on Frank's account; but he wiped his eyes when his
brother reappeared, and listened with pride to the soldiers' praise
of Frank's "grit," as they called it. When they let the boys go, the
little corporal wished Frank to accept a five-dollar gold piece; but
he politely declined it.




CHAPTER XVII.


The story of Frank's adventure and courage was the talk of all the
Oakland plantation. His mother and Cousin Belle both kissed him, and
called him their little hero. Willy also received a full share of
praise for his courage.

About noon there was great commotion among the troops. They were far
more numerous than they had been in the morning, and instead of riding
about the woods in small bodies, hunting for the concealed soldiers,
they were collecting together and preparing to move.

It was learned that a considerable body of cavalry was passing down
the road by Trinity Church, and that the depot had been burnt again
the night before. Somehow, a rumor got about that the Confederates
were following up the raiders.

In an hour most of the soldiers went away, but a number still stayed
on. Their horses were picketed about the yard feeding; and they
themselves lounged around, making themselves at home in the house, and
pulling to pieces the things that were left. They were not, however,
as wanton in their destruction as the first set, who had passed by the
year before.

Among those who yet remained were the little corporal, and the big
young soldier who had been so kind to Frank. They were in the
rear-guard. At length the last man rode off.

The boys had gone in and out among them, without being molested. Now
and then some rough fellow would swear at them, but for the most part
their intercourse with the boys was friendly. When, therefore, they
rode off, the boys were allowed by their mother to go and see the main
body.

Peter and Cole were with them. They took the main road and followed
along, picking up straps, and cartridges, and all those miscellaneous
things dropped by a large body of troops as they pass along.

Cartridges were very valuable, as they furnished the only powder and
shot the boys could get for hunting, and their supply was out. These
were found in unusual numbers. The boys filled their pockets, and
finally filled their sleeves, tying them tightly at the wrist with
strings, so that the contents would not spill out. One of the boys
found even an old pistol, which was considered a great treasure. He
bore it proudly in his belt, and was envied by all the others.

It was quite late in the afternoon when they thought of turning toward
home, their pockets and sleeves bagging down with the heavy
musket-cartridges. They left the Federal rear-guard feeding their
horses at a great white pile of corn which had been thrown out of the
corn-house of a neighbor, and was scattered all over the ground.

They crossed a field, descended a hill, and took the main road at its
foot, just as a body of cavalry came in sight. A small squad, riding
some little distance in advance of the main body, had already passed
by. These were Confederates. The first man they saw, at the head of
the column by the colonel, was the General, and a little behind him
was none other than Hugh on a gray roan; while not far down the column
rode their friend Tim Mills, looking rusty and sleepy as usual.

"Goodness! Why, here are the General and Hugh! How in the world did
you get away?" exclaimed the boys.

They learned that it was a column of cavalry following the line of the
raid, and that the General and Hugh had met them and volunteered. The
soldiers greeted the boys cordially.

"The Yankees are right up there," said the youngsters.

"Where? How many? What are they doing?" asked the General.

"A whole pack of 'em--right up there at the stables, and all about,
feeding their horses and sitting all around, and ever so many more
have gone along down the road."

"Fling the fence down there!" The boys pitched down the rails in two
or three places. An order was passed back, and in an instant a stir
of preparation was noticed all down the line of horsemen.

A courier galloped up the road to recall the advance-guard. The head
of the column passed through the gap, and, without waiting for the
others, dashed up the hill at a gallop--the General and the colonel a
score of yards ahead of any of the others.

"Let's go and see the fight!" cried the boys; and the whole set
started back up the hill as fast as their legs could carry them.

"S'pose they shoot! Won't they shoot us?" asked one of the negro boys,
in some apprehension. This, though before unthought of, was a
possibility, and for a moment brought them down to a slower pace.

"We can lie flat and peep over the top of the hill." This was Frank's
happy thought, and the party started ahead again. "Let's go around
that way." They made a little detour.

Just before they reached the crest they heard a shot, "bang!"
immediately followed by another, "bang!" and in a second more a
regular volley began, and was kept up.

They reached the crest of the hill in time to see the Confederates
gallop up the slope toward the stables, firing their pistols at the
blue-coats, who were forming in the edge of a little wood, over beyond
a fence, from the other side of which the smoke of their carbines was
rolling. They had evidently started on just as the boys left, and
before the Confederates came in sight.

The boys saw their friends dash at this fence, and could distinguish
the General and Hugh, who were still in the lead. Their horses took
the fence, going over like birds, and others followed,--Tim Mills
among them,--while yet more went through a gate a few yards to one
side.

"Look at Hugh! Look at Hugh!"

"Look! That horse has fallen down!" cried one of the boys, as a horse
went down just at the entrance of the wood, rolling over his rider.

"He's shot!" exclaimed Frank, for neither horse nor rider attempted to
rise.

"See; they are running!"

The little squad of blue-coats were retiring into the woods, with the
grays closely pressing them.

"Let's cut across and see 'em run 'em over the bridge."

"Come on!"

All the little group of spectators, white and black, started as hard
as they could go for a path they knew, which led by a short cut
through the little piece of woods. Beyond lay a field divided by a
stream, a short distance on the other side of which was a large body
of woods.

The popping was still going on furiously in the woods, and bullets
were "zoo-ing" over the fields. But the boys could not see anything,
and they did not think about the flying balls.

They were all excitement at the idea of "our men" whipping the enemy,
and they ran with all their might to be in time to see them "chase 'em
across the field."

The road on which the skirmish took place, and down which the Federal
rear-guard had retreated, made a sharp curve beyond the woods, around
the bend of a little stream crossed by a small bridge; and the boys,
in taking the short cut, had placed the road between themselves and
home; but they did not care about that, for their men were driving the
others. They "just wanted to see it."

They reached the edge of the field in time to see that the Yankees
were on the other side of the stream. They knew them to be where puffs
of smoke came out of the opposite wood. And the Confederates had
stopped beyond the bridge, and were halted, in some confusion, in the
field.

The firing was very sharp, and bullets were singing in every
direction. Then the Confederates got together, and went as hard as
they could right at them up to the wood, all along the edge of which
the smoke was pouring in continuous puffs and with a rattle of shots.
They saw several horses fall as the Confederates galloped on, but the
smoke hid most of it. Next they saw a long line of fire appear in the
smoke on both sides of the road, where it entered the wood; then the
Confederates stopped, and became all mixed up; a number of horses
galloped away without their riders, another line of white and red
flame came out of the woods, the Confederates began to come back,
leaving many horses on the ground, and a body of cavalry in blue coats
poured out of the wood in pursuit.

"Look! look! They are running--they are beating our men!" exclaimed
the boys. "They have driven 'em back across the bridge!"

"How many of them there are!"

"What shall we do? Suppose they see us!"

"Come on, Mah'srs Frank 'n' Willy, let's go home," said the colored
boys. "They'll shoot us."

The fight was now in the woods which lay between the boys and their
home. But just then the gray-coats got together, again turned at the
edge of the wood, and dashed back on their pursuers, and--the smoke
and bushes on the stream hid everything. In a second more both emerged
on the other side of the smoke and went into the woods on the further
edge of the field, all in confusion, and leaving on the ground more
horses and men than before.

"What's them things 'zip-zippin' 'round my ears?" asked one of the
negro boys.

"Bullets," said Frank, proud of his knowledge.

"Will they hurt me if they hit me?"

[Illustration: "LOOK! LOOK! THEY ARE RUNNING! THEY ARE BEATING OUR
MEN!" EXCLAIMED THE BOYS.]

"Of course they will. They'll kill you."

"I'm gwine home," said the boy, and off he started at a trot.

"Hold on!--We're goin', too; but let's go down this way; this is the
best way."

They went along the edge of the field, toward the point in the road
where the skirmish had been and where the Confederates had rallied.
They stopped to listen to the popping in the woods on the other side,
and were just saying how glad they were that "our men had whipped
them," when a soldier came along.

"What in the name of goodness are you boys doing here?" he asked.

"We're just looking on an' lis'ning," answered the boys meekly.

"Well, you'd better be getting home as fast as you can. They are too
strong for us, and they'll be driving us back directly, and some of
you may get killed or run over."

This was dreadful! Such an idea had never occurred to the boys. A
panic took possession of them.

"Come on! Let's go home!" This was the universal idea, and in a second
the whole party were cutting straight for home, utterly stampeded.

They could readily have found shelter and security back over the hill,
from the flying balls; but they preferred to get home, and they made
straight for it. The popping of the guns, which still kept up in the
woods across the little river, now meant to them that the victorious
Yankees were driving back their friends. They believed that the
bullets which now and then yet whistled over the woods with a long,
singing "zoo-ee," were aimed at them. For their lives, then, they ran,
expecting to be killed every minute.

The load of cartridges in their pockets, which they had carried for
hours, weighed them down. As they ran they threw these out. Then
followed those in their sleeves. Frank and the other boys easily got
rid of theirs, but Willy had tied the strings around his wrists in
such hard knots that he could not possibly untie them. He was falling
behind.

Frank heard him call. Without slacking his speed he looked back over
his shoulder. Willy's face was red, and his mouth was twitching. He
was sobbing a little, and was tearing at the strings with his teeth as
he ran. Then the strings came loose one after the other, the
cartridges were shaken out over the ground, and Willy's face at once
cleared up as he ran forward lightened of his load.

They had passed almost through the narrow skirt of woods where the
first attack was made, when they heard some one not far from the side
of the road call, "Water!"

The boys stopped. "What's that?" they asked each other in a startled
undertone. A groan came from the same direction, and a voice said,
"Oh, for some water!"

A short, whispered consultation was held.

"He's right up on that bank. There's a road up there."

Frank advanced a little; a man was lying somewhat propped up against a
tree. His eyes were closed, and there was a ghastly wound in his head.

"Willy, it's a Yankee, and he's shot."

"Is he dead?" asked the others, in awed voices.

"No. Let's ask him if he's hurt much."

They all approached him. His eyes were shut and his face was ashy
white.

"Willy, it's _my_ Yankee!" exclaimed Frank.

The wounded man moved his hand at the sound of the voices.

"Water," he murmured. "Bring me water, for pity's sake!"

"I'll get you some,--don't you know me? Let me have your canteen,"
said Frank, stooping and taking hold of the canteen. It was held by
its strap; but the boy whipped out a knife and cut it loose.

The man tried to speak; but the boys could not understand him.

"Where are you goin' get it, Frank?" asked the other boys.

"At the branch down there that runs into the creek."

"The Yankees'll shoot you down there," objected Peter and Willy.

"_I_ ain' gwine that way," said Cole.

The soldier groaned.

"_I'll_ go with you, Frank," said Willy, who could not stand the sight
of the man's suffering.

"We'll be back directly."

The two boys darted off, the others following them at a little
distance. They reached the open field. The shooting was still going on
in the woods on the other side, but they no longer thought of it. They
ran down the hill and dashed across the little flat to the branch at
the nearest point, washed the blood from the canteen, and filled it
with the cool water.

"I wish we had something to wash his face with," sighed Willy, "but I
haven't got a handkerchief."

"Neither have I." Willy looked thoughtful. A second more and he had
stripped off his light sailor's jacket and dipped it in the water. The
next minute the two boys were running up the hill again.

When they reached the spot where the wounded man lay, he had slipped
down and was flat on the ground. His feeble voice still called for
water, but was much weaker than before. Frank stooped and held the
canteen to the man's lips, and he drank. Then Willy and Frank,
together, bathed his face with the still dripping cotton jacket. This
revived him somewhat; but he did not recognize them and talked
incoherently. They propped up his head.

"Frank, it's getting mighty late, and we've got to go home," said
Willy.

The boys' voice or words reached the ears of the wounded man.

"Take me home," he murmured; "I want some water from the well by the
dairy."

"Give him some more water."

Willy lifted the canteen. "Here it is."

The soldier swallowed with difficulty.

He could not raise his hand now. There was a pause. The boys stood
around, looking down on him. "I've come back home," he said. His eyes
were closed.

"He's dreaming," whispered Willy.

"Did you ever see anybody die?" asked Frank, in a low tone.

Willy's face paled.

"No, Frank; let's go home and tell somebody."

Frank stooped and touched the soldier's face. He was talking all the
time now, though they could not understand everything he said. The
boy's touch seemed to rouse him.

"It's bedtime," he said, presently. "Kneel down and say your prayers
for Father."

"Willy, let's say our prayers for him," whispered Frank.

"I can say, 'Now I lay me.'" But before he could begin,

"'Now I lay me down to sleep,'" said the soldier tenderly. The boys
followed him, thinking he had heard them. They did not know that he
was saying--for one whom but that morning he had called "his
curly-head at home"--the prayer that is common to Virginia and to
Delaware, to North and to South, and which no wars can silence and no
victories cause to be forgotten.

The soldier's voice now was growing almost inaudible. He spoke between
long-drawn breaths.

"'If I should die before I wake.'"

"'If I should die before I wake,'" they repeated, and continued the
prayer.

"'And this I ask for Jesus' sake,'" said the boys, ending. There was a
long pause. Frank stroked the pale face softly with his hands.

"'And this I ask for Jesus' sake,'" whispered the lips. Then, very
softly, "Kiss me good-night."

"Kiss him, Frank."

The boy stooped over and kissed the lips that had kissed him in the
morning. Willy kissed him, also. The lips moved in a faint smile.

"God bless----"

The boys waited,--but that was all. The dusk settled down in the
woods. The prayer was ended.

"He's dead," said Frank, in deep awe.

"Frank, aren't you mighty sorry?" asked Willy in a trembling voice.
Then he suddenly broke out crying.

"I don't want him to die! I don't want him to die!"




CHAPTER XVIII.


When the boys reached home it was pitch-dark. They found their mother
very anxious about them. They gave an account of the "battle," as they
called it, telling all about the charge, in which, by their statement,
the General and Hugh did wonderful deeds. Their mother and Cousin
Belle sat and listened with tightly folded hands and blanched faces.

Then they told how they found the wounded Yankee soldier on the bank,
and about his death. They were startled by seeing their Cousin Belle
suddenly fall on her knees and throw herself across their mother's lap
in a passion of tears. Their mother put her arms around the young
girl, kissed and soothed her.

Early the next morning their mother had an ox-cart (the only vehicle
left on the place), sent down to the spot to bring the body of the
soldier up to Oakland, so that it might be buried in the grave-yard
there. Carpenter William made the coffin, and several men were set to
work to dig the grave in the garden.

It was about the middle of the day when the cart came back. A sheet
covered the body. The little cortege was a very solemn one, the
steers pulling slowly up the hill and a man walking on each side. Then
the body was put into the coffin and reverently carried to the grave.
The boys' mother read the burial service out of the prayer-book, and
afterward Uncle William Slow offered a prayer. Just as they were about
to turn away, the boys' mother began to sing, "Abide with me; fast
falls the eventide." She and Cousin Belle and the boys sang the hymn
together, and then all walked sadly away, leaving the fresh mound in
the garden, where birds peeped curiously from the lilac-bushes at the
soldier's grave in the warm, light of the afternoon sun.

A small packet of letters and a gold watch and chain, found in the
soldier's pocket, were sealed up by the boys' mother and put in her
bureau drawer, for they could not then be sent through the lines.
There was one letter, however, which they buried with him. It
contained two locks of hair, one gray, the other brown and curly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next few months brought no new incidents, but the following year
deep gloom fell upon Oakland. It was not only that the times were
harder than they had ever been--though the plantation was now utterly
destitute; there were no provisions and no crops, for there were no
teams. It was not merely that a shadow was settling down on all the
land; for the boys did not trouble themselves about these things,
though such anxieties were bringing gray hairs to their mother's
temples.

The General had been wounded and captured during a cavalry fight. The
boys somehow connected their Cousin Belle with the General's capture,
and looked on her with some disfavor. She and the General had
quarrelled a short time before, and it was known that she had returned
his ring. When, therefore, he was shot through the body and taken by
the enemy, the boys could not admit that their cousin had any right to
stay up-stairs in her own room weeping about it. They felt that it was
all her own fault, and they told her so; whereupon she simply burst
out crying and ran from the room.

The hard times grew harder. The shadow deepened. Hugh was wounded and
captured in a charge at Petersburg, and it was not known whether he
was badly hurt or not. Then came the news that Richmond had been
evacuated. The boys knew that this was a defeat; but even then they
did not believe that the Confederates were beaten. Their mother was
deeply affected by the news.

That night at least a dozen of the negroes disappeared. The other
servants said the missing ones had gone to Richmond "to get their
papers."

A week or so later the boys heard the rumor that General Lee had
surrendered at a place called Appomattox. When they came home and told
their mother what they had heard, she turned as pale as death, arose,
and went into her chamber. The news was corroborated next day. During
the following two days, every negro on the plantation left, excepting
lame old Sukey Brown. Some of them came and said they had to go to
Richmond, that "the word had come" for them. Others, including even
Uncle Balla and Lucy Ann, slipped away by night.

After that their mother had to cook, and the boys milked and did the
heavier work. The cooking was not much trouble, however, for
black-eyed pease were about all they had to eat.

One afternoon, the second day after the news of Lee's surrender, the
boys, who had gone to drive up the cows to be milked, saw two
horsemen, one behind the other, coming slowly down the road on the far
hill. The front horse was white, and, as their father rode a white
horse, they ran toward the house to carry the news. Their mother and
Cousin Belle, however, having seen the horsemen, were waiting on the
porch as the men came through the middle gate and rode across the
field.

It was their father and his body-servant, Ralph, who had been with him
all through the war. They came slowly up the hill; the horses limping
and fagged, the riders dusty and drooping.

It seemed like a funeral. The boys were near the steps, and their
mother stood on the portico with her forehead resting against a
pillar. No word was spoken. Into the yard they rode at a walk, and up
to the porch. Then their father, who had not once looked up, put both
hands to his face, slipped from his horse, and walked up the steps,
tears running down his cheeks, and took their mother into his arms. It
_was_ a funeral--the Confederacy was dead.

A little later, their father, who had been in the house, came out on
the porch near where Ralph still stood holding the horses.

"Take off the saddles, Ralph, and turn the horses out," he said.

Ralph did so.

"Here,--here's my last dollar. You have been a faithful servant to me.
Put the saddles on the porch." It was done. "You are free," he said to
the black, and then he walked back into the house.

Ralph stood where he was for some minutes without moving a muscle. His
eyes blinked mechanically. Then he looked at the door and at the
windows above him. Suddenly he seemed to come to himself. Turning
slowly, he walked solemnly out of the yard.




CHAPTER XIX.


The boys' Uncle William came the next day. The two weeks which
followed were the hardest the boys had ever known. As yet nothing had
been heard of Hugh or the General, though the boys' father went to
Richmond to see whether they had been released.

The family lived on corn-bread and black-eyed pease. There was not a
mouthful of meat on the plantation. A few aged animals were all that
remained on the place.

The boys' mother bought a little sugar and made some cakes, and the
boys, day after day, carried them over to the depot and left them with
a man there to be sold. Such a thing had never been known before in
the history of the family.

A company of Yankees were camped very near, but they did not interfere
with the boys. They bought the cakes and paid for them in greenbacks,
which were the first new money they had at Oakland. One day the boys
were walking along the road, coming back from the camp, when they met
a little old one-horse wagon driven by a man who lived near the depot.
In it were a boy about Willy's size and an old lady with white hair,
both in deep mourning. The boy was better dressed than any boy they
had ever seen. They were strangers.

The boys touched their limp little hats to the lady, and felt somewhat
ashamed of their own patched clothes in the presence of the
well-dressed stranger. Frank and Willy passed on. They happened to
look back. The wagon stopped just then, and the lady called them:

"Little boys!"

They halted and returned.

"We are looking for my son; and this gentleman tells me that you live
about here, and know more of the country than any one else I may
meet."

"Do you know where any graves is?--Yankee graves?" asked the driver,
cutting matters short.

"Yes, there are several down on the road by Pigeon Hill, where the
battle was, and two or three by the creek down yonder, and there's one
in our garden."

"Where was your son killed, ma'am? Do you know that he was killed?"
asked the driver.

"I do not know. We fear that he was; but, of course, we still hope
there may have been some mistake. The last seen of him was when
General Sheridan went through this country, last year. He was with his
company in the rear-guard, and was wounded and left on the field. We
hoped he might have been found in one of the prisons; but there is no
trace of him, and we fear----"

[Illustration: THE BOYS SELL THEIR CAKES TO THE YANKEES.]

She broke down and began to cry. "He was my only son," she sobbed, "my
only son--and I gave him up for the Union, and----" She could say no
more.

Her distress affected the boys deeply.

"If I could but find his grave. Even that would be better than this
agonizing suspense."

"What was your son's name?" asked the boys, gently.

She told them.

"Why, that's our soldier!" exclaimed both boys.

"Do you know him?" she asked eagerly. "Is--? Is----?" Her voice
refused to frame the fearful question.

"Yes'm. In our garden," said the boys, almost inaudibly.

The mother bent her head over on her grandson's shoulder and wept
aloud. Awful as the suspense had been, now that the last hope was
removed the shock was terrible. She gave a stifled cry, then wept with
uncontrollable grief.

The boys, with pale faces and eyes moist with sympathy, turned away
their heads and stood silent. At length she grew calmer.

"Won't you come home with us? Our father and mother will be so glad to
have you," they said hospitably.

After questioning them a little further, she decided to go. The boys
climbed into the back of the wagon. As they went along, the boys told
her all about her son,--his carrying Frank, their finding him wounded
near the road, and about his death and burial.

"He was a real brave soldier," they told her consolingly.

As they approached the house, she asked whether they could give her
grandson something to eat.

"Oh, yes, indeed. Certainly," they answered. Then, thinking perhaps
they were raising her hopes too high, they exclaimed apologetically:

"We haven't got much. We didn't kill any squirrels this morning. Both
our guns are broken and don't shoot very well, now."

She was much impressed by the appearance of the place, which looked
very beautiful among the trees.

"Oh, yes, they're big folks," said the driver.

She would have waited at the gate when they reached the house, but the
boys insisted that they all should come in at once. One of them ran
forward and, meeting his mother just coming out to the porch, told who
the visitor was.

Their mother instantly came down the steps and walked toward the gate.
The women met face to face. There was no introduction. None was
needed.

"My son----" faltered the elder lady, her strength giving out.

The boys' mother put her handkerchief to her eyes.

"I have one, too;--God alone knows where he is," she sobbed.

Each knew how great was the other's loss, and in sympathy with
another's grief found consolation for her own.




CHAPTER XX.


The visitors remained at Oakland for several days, as the lady wished
to have her son's remains removed to the old homestead in Delaware.
She was greatly distressed over the want which she saw at Oakland--for
there was literally nothing to eat but black-eyed pease and the boys'
chickens. Every incident of the war interested her. She was delighted
with their Cousin Belle, and took much interest in her story, which
was told by the boys' mother.

Her grandson, Dupont, was a fine, brave, and generous young fellow. He
had spent his boyhood near a town, and could neither ride, swim, nor
shoot as the Oakland boys did; but he was never afraid to try
anything, and the boys took a great liking to him, and he to them.

When the young soldier's body had been removed, the visitors left;
not, however, until the boys had made their companion promise to pay
them a visit. After the departure of these friends they were much
missed.

But the next day there was a great rejoicing at Oakland. Every one was
in the dining-room at dinner, and the boys' father had just risen from
the table and walked out of the room. A second later they heard an
exclamation of astonishment from him, and he called eagerly to his
wife, "Come here, quickly!" and ran down the steps. Every one rose and
ran out. Hugh and the General were just entering the yard.

They were pale and thin and looked ill; but all the past was forgotten
in the greeting.

       *       *       *       *       *

The boys soon knew that the General was making his peace with their
Cousin Belle, who looked prettier than ever. It required several long
walks before all was made right; but there was no disposition toward
severity on either side. It was determined that the wedding was to
take place very soon. The boys' father suggested, as an objection to
an immediate wedding, that since the General was just half his usual
size, it would be better to wait until he should regain his former
proportions, so that all of him might be married; but the General
would not accept the proposition for delay, and Cousin Belle finally
consented to be married at once.

The old place was in a great stir over the preparations. A number of
the old servants, including Uncle Balla and Lucy Ann, had one by one
come back to their old home. The trunks in the garret were ransacked
once more, and enough was found to make up a wedding trousseau of two
dresses.

Hugh was to be the General's best man, and the boys were to be the
ushers. The only difficulty was that their patched clothes made them
feel a little abashed at the prominent roles they were to assume.
However, their mother made them each a nice jacket from a striped
dress, one of her only two dresses, and she adorned them with the
military brass buttons their father had had taken from his coat; so
they felt very proud. Their father, of course, was to give the bride
away,--an office he accepted with pleasure, he said, provided he did
not have to move too far, which might be hazardous so long as he had
to wear his spurs to keep the soles on his boots.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus, even amid the ruins, the boys found life joyous, and if they
were without everything else, they had life, health, and hope. The old
guns were broken, and they had to ride in the ox-cart; but they hoped
to have others and to do better, some day.

The "some day" came sooner than they expected.

The morning before the wedding, word came that there were at the
railroad station several boxes for their mother. The ox-cart was sent
for them. When the boxes arrived, that evening, there was a letter
from their friend in Delaware, congratulating Cousin Belle and
apologizing for having sent "a few things" to her Southern friends.

[Illustration: SOME OF THE SERVANTS CAME BACK TO THEIR OLD HOME.]

The "few things" consisted not only of necessaries, but of everything
which good taste could suggest. There was a complete trousseau for
Cousin Belle, and clothes for each member of the family. The boys had
new suits of fine cloth with shirts and underclothes in plenty.

But the best surprise of all was found when they came to the bottom of
the biggest box, and found two long, narrow cases, marked, "For the
Oakland boys." These cases held beautiful, new double-barrelled guns
of the finest make. There was a large supply of ammunition, and in
each case there was a letter from Dupont promising to come and spend
his vacation with them, and sending his love and good wishes and
thanks to his friends--the "Two Little Confederates."

THE END.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes

Original spelling, hyphenation, capitalization, and punctuation have
been retained except for the following changes:

Page 20: oe in Coeur was originally a ligature (C[oe]ur de Lion.)

Page 20: hen-roots changed to hen-roosts (hen-roots were robbed).

Page 86: litttle changed to little (looked a litttle rustier).

Page 107: throughly changed to thoroughly (throughly enjoyed their
holiday;).

Page 121: oe in manoeuvres was originally a ligature (their
man[oe]uvres for some time.).



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LITTLE CONFEDERATES***


******* This file should be named 26725-8.txt or 26725-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/7/2/26725



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

