The Project Gutenberg EBook of Desert Air, by Robert Hichens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Desert Air
       1905

Author: Robert Hichens

Release Date: November 8, 2007 [EBook #23418]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESERT AIR ***




Produced by David Widger






DESERT AIR

By Robert Hichens

Frederick A. Stokes Company Publishers

Copyright, 1905




I

On an evening of last summer I was dining in London at the Carlton with
two men. One of them was an excellent type of young England, strong,
healthy, athletic, and straightforward. The other was a clever London
doctor who was building up a great practice in the West End. At dessert
the conversation turned upon a then recent tragedy in which a great
reputation had gone down, and young England spoke rather contemptuously
of the victim, with the superior surprise human beings generally express
about the sin which does not happen to be theirs.

"I can't understand it!" was his conclusion. "It's beyond me."

"Climate," said the doctor quietly.

"What?"

"Climate. Air."

Young England looked inexpressively astonished.

"But hang it all!" he exclaimed, "you don't mean to say change of air
means change of nature?"

"Not to everyone. Not to you, perhaps. Have you travelled much?"

"Well, I've been to Paris for the Grand Prix, and to Monte----"

"For the gambling. That's hardly travelling. Now, I've studied this
subject a little, quietly in Harley Street. I'm no traveller myself,
but I have dozens of patients who are. And I'm convinced that the modern
facilities for travel, besides giving an infinity of pleasure, bring
about innumerable tragedies."

He turned to me.

"You go abroad a great deal. What do you say?"

"That you're perfectly right. And I'm prepared to affirm that, in
highly-strung, imaginative, or over-worked people change of climate does
sometimes actually cause, or seem to cause, change of nature."

Young England, who was by no means highly-strung or imaginative, looked
politely dubious, but the doctor was evidently pleased.

"An ally!" he cried.

He glanced at me for an instant, then added:

"You've got a case that proves it, at any rate to you, in your mind."

"Quite true."

"Can you give it us?"

"Jove! let's have it!" exclaimed young England.

"Certainly, if you like," I said. "I don't know whether you ever heard
of the Marnier affair?"

Young England shook his head, but the doctor replied at once.

"Three years ago, wasn't it?"

"Four."

"And it happened in some remote place in the Sahara Desert?"

"In Beni-Kouidar. I was with Henry Marnier in Beni-Kouidar at the time."

"Go ahead!" said young England more eagerly.

"Poor Marnier was not an old friend of mine, but an acquaintance whom I
had met casually at Beni-Mora, which is known as a health resort."

"I send patients there sometimes," said the doctor.

"The railway stops at Beni-Mora. To reach Beni-Kouidar one must go on
horse or camel back over between three and four hundred kilometres of
desert, sleeping on the way at Travellers' Houses--Bordjs as they are
called there. Beni-Kouidar lies in the midst of immeasurable sands,
and the air that blows through its palm gardens, and round its mosque
towers, and down its alleys under the arcades, is startling: dry as the
finest champagne, almost fiercely pure and fresh, exhilarating--well,
too exhilarating for certain people."

The doctor nodded.

"Champagne goes very quickly to some heads," he interjected.

"Beni-Kouidar has nothing to say to modern civilisation. It is a wild
and turbulent city, divided into quarters--the Arab quarter, the Jews'
quarter, the freed negroes' quarter, and so on--and furthermore, is
infested at certain seasons by the Sahara nomads, who camp in filthy
tents on the huge sand dunes round about, and sell rugs, burnouses, and
Touareg work to the inhabitants, buying in return the dates for which
the palms of Beni-Kouidar are celebrated.

"I wanted to see a real Sahara city to which the Cook's tourist had not
as yet penetrated, and I resolved to ride there from Beni-Mora. When
Henry Marnier heard of it he asked if he might accompany me.

"Marnier was a young man who had recently left Oxford, and who had come
out to Beni-Mora only a week before to see his mother, who was
going through the sulphur cure. He was what is generally called a
'serious-minded young man'; intellectual, inclined to grave reading and
high thinking, totally devoid of frivolity, a little cold in manner and
temperament, one would have sworn; in fact, a type of a very well-known
kind of Oxford undergraduate, the kind that takes a good tutorship for a
year or so after leaving the University, and then becomes a schoolmaster
or a clergyman. Marnier, by the way, intended to take orders.

"Now, this sort of young man is not precisely my sort, and especially
not my sort in the Sahara Desert. But I did not want to be rude to
Marnier, who was friendly and agreeable, and obviously anxious to
increase his already considerable store of knowledge. So I put my
inclinations in my pocket, and, with inward reluctance, I agreed.

"We set off with Safti, my faithful one-eyed Arab guide, and after three
long days of riding and talking--as I had feared--Maeterlink and
Tolstoy, Henley and Verlaine (this last being utterly condemned by
Marnier as a man of weak character and degraded life) we saw the towers
of Beni-Kouidar aspiring above the shifting sands, the tufted summits of
the thousands of palm-trees, and heard the dull beating of drums and the
cries of people borne to us over the spaces of which silence is the
steady guardian.

"We were all pretty tired, but Marnier was, especially done up. He had
recently been working very hard for the 'first' with which he had left
Oxford, and was not in good condition. We were, therefore, glad enough
when we rode through the wide street thronged with natives, turned the
corner into the great camel market, and finally dismounted before
the door of the one inn, the 'Rendezvous des Amis,' a mean, dusty,
one-storey building, on whose dirty white wall was a crude painting of a
preposterous harridan in a purple empire gown, pouring wine for a Zouave
who was evidently afflicted with elephantiasis. Yet, tired as I was,
I stepped out into the camel market for a moment before going into the
house, emptied my lungs, and slowly filled them.

"'What air!' I said to Marnier, who had followed me.

"'It is extraordinary,' he answered in his rather dry tenor voice.
'I should say like the best champagne, if I did not happen to be a
teetotaller.'

"(The market, I must explain, was not at that moment in active
operation.)

"After a _bain de siege_--we both longed for total immersion--and some
weak tea, in which I mingled a spoonful of rum, we felt better, but
we reposed till dinner, and once again Marnier, in his habitually
restrained and critical manner, discussed contemporary literature, and
what Plato and Aristotle, judging by; their writings, would have been
likely to think of it. And once again I felt as if I were in the 'High'
at Oxford, and was almost inclined to wish that Marnier was the rowdy
type of undergrad, who ducks people in water troughs and makes bonfires
in quads."

"H'm!" said the doctor gravely. "Better, perhaps, if he had been."

"Much better," I answered. "At seven o'clock we ate a rather tough
dinner in the small, bare _salle-à-manger_, on the red brick floor of
which sand grains were lying. Our only companion was a bearded priest in
a dirty soutane, the aumônier of Beni-Kouidar, who sat at a little table
apart, and greeted our entrance with a polite bow, but did not then
speak to us.

"When the meal was ended, however, he joined us as we stood at the inn
door looking out into the night. A moon was rising above the palms, and
gilding the cupolas of the Bureau Arabe on the far side of the Market
Square. A distant noise of tomtoms and African pipes was audible.
And all down the hill to our left--for the land rose to where the inn
stood--fires gleamed, and we could see half-naked figures passing and
repassing them, and others squatting beside, looking like monks in their
hooped burnouses.

"'You are going out, messieurs?' said the aumônier politely.

"I looked at Marnier.

"'You're too done up, I expect?' I said to him.

"His face was pale, and he certainly had the demeanour of a tired man.

"'No,' he answered. 'I should like to stroll in this wonderful air.'

"I turned to the priest.

"'Yes, monsieur,' I said.

"'I come here to take my meals, but I live at the edge of the town.
Perhaps you will permit me to accompany you for a little way.'

"'We shall be delighted, and we know nothing of Beni-Kouidar.'

"As we stepped out into the market Marnier paused to light his pipe. But
suddenly he threw away the match he had struck.

"'No, it's a sin to smoke in this air,' he said.

"And he drew a deep breath, looking at the round moon.

"The priest smiled.

"'I have lived here for four years,' he said, 'and cannot resist my
cigar. But you are right. The air of Beni-Kouidar is extraordinary. When
first I came here it used to mount to my head like wine.'

"'Bad for you, Marnier!' I said, laughing.

"Then I added, to the aumônier:

"'My friend never drinks wine, and so ought to be peculiarly susceptible
to such an influence.'"




II

"Opposite to the aumonier's dwelling was the great dancing-house of the
town, and when we had bade him good-night, and turned to go back to the
inn, I rather tentatively suggested to Marnier that, perhaps, it would
be interesting to look in there for a moment.

"'All right,' he responded, with his most donnish manner. 'But I expect
it will be rather an unwashed crowd.'

"A quantity of native soldiers--the sort that used to be called
Turcos--were gathered round the door. We pushed our way through them,
and entered. The café was large, with big white pillars and a double row
of divans in the middle, and divans rising in tiers all round. On the
left was a large doorway, in which gorgeously-dressed painted women,
with gold crowns on their heads, were standing, smoking cigarettes,
and laughing with the Arabs; and at the end farthest from the street
entrance was a raised platform, on which sat three musicians--a
wild-looking demon of a man blowing into an instrument with an immense
funnel, and two men beating tomtoms. The noise they made was terrific.
The piper wore a voluminous burnouse, and as the dancers came in in
pairs from the big doorway, which led into the court where they all live
together, each in her separate little room with her own front door, they
threw their door keys into the hood that was attached to it. As soon as
they had finished dancing they went to the hood, and rummaged violently
for them again. And all the time the piper blew frantically into his
instrument, and rocked himself about like a man in a convulsion.

"We sat on one of the raised divans, with coffee before us on a
wooden stool, and Marnier observed it all with a slightly supercilious
coldness. The women, who were dressed in different shades of red, and
were the most amazing trollops I ever set eyes on, came and went in
pairs, fluttered their painted fingers, twittered like startled birds,
jumped and twirled, wriggled and revolved, and inclined their greasy
foreheads to the impenetrable spectators, who stuck silver coins on
to the perspiring flesh. And Marnier sat and gazed at them with the
aloofness of one who watches the creatures in puddle water through a
microscope. I could scarcely help laughing at him, but I wished him
away. For to me there was excitement, there was even a sort of ecstasy,
in the utter barbarity of this spectacle, in the moving scarlet figures
with their golden crowns and tufts of ostrich plumes, in the serried
masses of turbaned and hooded spectators, in the rocking forms of the
musicians, in the strident and ceaseless uproar that they made.

"And through the doorway where the Tur-cos--I like the old name--crowded
I saw the sand filtering in from the desert, and against the black
leaves of a solitary palm-tree, with leaves like giant Fatma hands, I
saw the silver disc of the moon.

"'I vote we go,' said Marnier's light tenor voice in my ear. 'The
atmosphere's awful in here.' "'Very well,' I said.

"I got up; but just then a girl, dressed in midnight purple embroidered
with silver, came in from the doorway, and began to dance alone. She was
very young--fourteen, I found out afterwards--and, in contrast to the
other women, extremely beautiful. There were grace, seduction, mystery,
and coquetry in her face and in all her movements. Her long black eyes
held fire and dreams. Her fluttering hands seemed beckoning us to the
realms of the thousand and one nights. I stood where I had got up, and
watched her.

"'I say, aren't we going?' said Marnier's voice in my ear.

"I cursed the day when I had agreed to take him with me, leaped down
to the earth, and struggled towards the door. As we neared it the girl
sidled down the room till she was exactly in front of Marnier. Then
she danced before him, smiling with her immense eyes, which she fixed
steadily upon him, and bending forward her pretty head, covered with a
cloth of silver handkerchief.

"'Give her something,' I said to him, laughing, as he stared back at her
grimly.

"He thrust his hand into his pocket, found a franc, stuck it awkwardly
against her oval forehead, and followed me out.

"When we were in the sandy street he walked a few steps in silence, then
stood still, and, to my surprise, stared back at the dancing-house. Then
he put his hand to his head.

"'Is the air having its alcoholic effect?' I asked in joke.

"As I spoke a handsome Arab, splendidly dressed in a pale blue robe,
red gaiters and boots, and a turban of fine muslin, spangled with gold,
passed us slowly, going towards the dancing-house. He cast a glance full
of suspicion and malice at Marnier.

"'What's up with that fellow?' I said, startled.

"The Arab went on, and at that moment the faithful Safti joined us. He
never left me long out of his sight in these outlandish places.

"'That is the Batouch Sidi, the brother of the Caïd of Beni-Kouidar,' he
said. 'Algia, the dancer to whom Monsieur Henri has just given money,
is his _chère amie_. But as the government has just made him a sheik, he
dares not have her in his house for fear of the scandal. So he has put
her with the dancers. That is why she dances, to deceive everyone, not
to make money. She is not as the other dancers. But everyone knows, for
Batouch is mad with jealousy. He cannot bear that Algia should dance
before strangers, but what can he do? A sheik must not have a scandal in
his dwelling.'

"We walked on slowly. When we got to the door of the 'Rendezvous des
Amis' Marnier stood still again, and looked down the deserted, moonlit
camel market.

"'I never knew air like this,' he said in a low voice.

"And once more he expelled the air from his lungs, and drew in a long,
slow breath, as a man does when he has finished his dumbbell exercise in
the morning.

"'Don't drink too much of it,' I said. 'Remember what the aumônier told
us!'

"Marnier looked at me. I thought there was something apprehensive in his
eyes. But he said nothing, and we turned in.

"The next day I rode out with Safti into the desert to visit a sacred
personage of great note in the Sahara, Sidi El Ahmed Ben Daoud
Abderahmann. To my relief Marnier declined to come. He said he was
tired, and would stroll about the city. When we got back at sundown the
innkeeper handed me a note. I opened it, and found it was from the
aumônier, saying that he would be greatly obliged if I would call and
see him on my return, as he had various little curiosities which he
would be glad to show me. Marnier was not in the inn, and, as I had
nothing particular to do, I walked at once to the aumonier's house. As I
have said, it was the last in the town. The dancing-house was on the
opposite side of the way; but the aumonier's dwelling jutted out a
little farther into the desert, and looked full on a deep depression of
soft sand bounded by a big dune, which loomed up like a couchant beast
in the fading yellow light.

"The aumônier met me at his door, and escorted me into a pleasant room,
where his collection of Arab weapons, coins, and old vases, cups, and
various utensils, dug up, he told me, at Tlemcen, was arranged. But to
my surprise he scarcely took time to show it to me before he said:

"'Though a stranger, may I venture to speak rather intimately to you,
monsieur?'

"'Certainly,' I replied, in some astonishment.

"'Your friend is young.'

"'Marnier?'

"'Is that his name? Well, I would not leave him to stroll about too much
alone, if I were you.'

"'Why, monsieur?'

"'He is likely to get into trouble. The people here are a wild and
violent race. He would do well to bear in mind the saying of a traveller
who knew the desert men better than most people:

"If you want to be friendly with them, and safe among them, give
cigarettes to the men, and leave the women alone.

"'I see a good deal, monsieur, owing to the situation of my little
house.'

"I looked at him in silence. Then I said:

"'What have you seen?'

"He led me to the door, and pointed towards the great dune beyond the
dancing-house.

"I saw your friend this afternoon talking there with one whom it is
especially unsafe to be seen with in Beni-Koujtlar.'

"'With whom?'

"'A dancer called Àlgia.'

"'Talking, monsieur! Marnier knows no Arabic.'

"The aumônier pursed his lips in his black beard.

"'The conversation appeared to be carried on by signs,' he responded.
'That did not make it less but more dangerous.'

"I'm afraid I was rude, and whistled softly.

"'Monsieur l'Aumônier,' I said, 'you must forgive me, but this air is
certainly the very devil.'

"He smiled, not without irony.

"'I became aware of that myself, monsieur, when first I came to live in
Beni-Kouidar. But I am a priest, and--well, monsieur, I was given the
strength to say: "Get thee behind me, Satan."'

"A softer look came into his sunburnt, wrinkled face.

"'Better take your friend away as soon as possible,' he added, 'or there
will be trouble.'"




III

"That night I found myself confronted by a Marnier whom I had never seen
before. The desert wine had gone to the lad's brain. That was certain.
No intonations of the Oxford don lurked in the voice. No reminiscences
of the Oxford 'High' clung about the manner. A man sober and the same
man drunk are scarcely more different than the Marnier who had ridden
with me up the sandy street of Beni-Kouidar the previous day and the
man who sat opposite to me at dinner in the 'Rendezvous des Amis' that
night. I knew in a moment that the aumônier was right, and that I must
get the lad away at once from the intoxicant which nature poured out
over this far-away city. His eyes were shining feverishly, and when I
mentioned Mr. Ruskin in a casual way he looked unutterably bored.

"'Ruskin and all those fellows seem awfully slow and out of place here,'
he exclaimed. 'One doesn't want to bother about them in the Sahara.'

"I changed the subject.

"'There doesn't seem very much to see here,' I said carelessly. 'We
might get away the day after to-morrow, don't you think?'

"He drew his brows down.

"'The horses won't be sufficiently rested,' he said curtly.

"'Oh yes; I fancy they will.'

"'Well, I don't fancy I shall. The long ride took it out of me.'

"'Turn in to-night, then, directly after dinner.'

"He looked at me with sharp suspicion. I met his gaze blandly.

"'I mean to,' he said after a short pause.

"I knew he was telling me a lie, but I only said: 'That's right!' and
resolved to keep an eye on him.

"Directly dinner was over he sprang up from the table.

"'Good-night,' he said.

"And before I could reply he was out of the _salle-à-manger_, and I
heard him tramp along the brick floor of the passage, go into his room,
and bang the door.

"The aumônier was getting up from his little table, and shaking the
crumbs from his soutane.

"'You are quite right, monsieur,' I said to him. 'I must get my friend
away.'

"'I shall be sorry to lose you,' replied the good priest. 'But--desert
air, desert air!'

"He shook his head, half wistfully, half laughingly, bowed, put on his
broad-brimmed black hat, and went out.

"After a moment I followed him. I stood in the doorway of the inn, and
lit a cigar. I knew Marnier was not going to bed, and meant to catch him
when he came out, and join him. In common politeness he could scarcely
refuse my company, since he had asked me as a favour to let him come
with me to Beni-Kouidar. I waited, watching the moon rise, till my cigar
was smoked out. Then I lit another. Still he did not come. I heard the
distant throb of tomtoms beyond the Bureau Arabe in the quarter of the
freed negroes. They were having a fantasia. I began to think that I must
have been mistaken, and that Marnier had really turned in. So much the
better. The ash dropped from the stump of my second cigar, and the
deserted camel market was flooded with silver from the moon-rays. I knew
there was only one door to the inn. Slowly I lit a third cigar.

"A large cloud went over the face of the moon. A gust of wind struck my
face. Suddenly the night had changed. The moon looked forth again, and
was again obscured. A second gust struck me like a blow, and my face
was stung by a multitude of sand grains. I heard steps behind me in the
brick passage, turned swiftly, and saw the landlord.

"'I must shut the door, m'sieu,' he said. 'There's a bad sandstorm
coming up.'

"As he spoke the wind roared, and over the camel market a thick fog
seemed to fall abruptly. It was a sheet of sand from the surrounding
dunes. I threw away my cigar, stepped into the passage, and the landlord
banged the door, and drove home the heavy bolts.

"Then I went to Marnier's room, and knocked. I felt sure, but I thought
I would make sure before going to my room.

"No answer.

"I knocked again loudly.

"Again no answer.

"Then I turned the handle, and entered.

"The room was empty. I glanced round quickly. The small window was open.
All the windows of the inn were barred, but, as I learned later, a bar
in Marnier's had been broken, and was not yet replaced when we arrived
at Beni-Kouidar. In consequence of this it was possible to squeeze
through into the arcade outside. This was what Marnier had done.
My precise, gentlemanly, reserved, and methodical acquaintance had
deliberately given me the slip by sneaking out of a window like a
schoolboy, and creeping round the edge of the inn to the _fosse_ that
lay in the shadow of the sand dimes. As I realised this I realised his
danger.

"I ran to my room, fetched my revolver, slipped it into my pocket, and
hurried to the front door. The landlord heard me trying to undo the
bolts, and came out protesting.

"'M'sieu cannot go out into the storm.'

"'I must.'

"'But m'sieu does not know what Beni-Kouidar is like when the sand
is blown on the wind. It is _enfer_. Besides, it is not safe. In the
darkness m'sieu may receive a _mauvais coup_.'

"'Make haste, please, and open the door. I am going to fetch my friend.'

"He pulled the bolts, grumbling and swearing, and I went out into
_enfer_. For he was right. A sandstorm at night in Beni-Kouidar is hell.

"Luckily, Safti joined me mysteriously from the deuce knows where, and
we staggered to the dancing-house somehow, and struggled in, blinded,
our faces scored, our clothes heavy with sand, our pockets, our very
boots, weighed down with it.

"The tomtoms were roaring, the pipe was yelling, blown by the frantic
demon with his hood full of latch keys, the impassible, bearded faces
were watching the painted women who, in their red garments and their
golden crowns, promenaded down the earthen floor, between the divans,
fluttering their dyed fingers, smiling grotesquely like idols, bending
forward their greasy foreheads to receive the tribute of their admirers.

"I ran my eyes swiftly over the mob. Marnier was not in it. I pushed my
way towards the doorway on the left which gave on to the court of the
dancers.

"Safti caught hold of my arm.

"'It is not safe to go in there on such a night, Sidi. There are no
lamps. It is black as a tomb. And no one can tell who may be there.
Nomads, perhaps, men of evil from the south. Many murders have been done
in the court on black nights, and no one can say who has done them. For
all the time men go in and out to the rooms of the dancers.'

"'Nevertheless, Safti, I must----'

"I stopped speaking, for at this moment Batouch, the brother of the Caïd
of Beni-Kouidar, came slowly in through the doorway from the blackness
of the sand-swept court. There was a strange smile on his handsome face,
and he was caressing his black beard gently with one delicate hand. He
saw me, smiled more till I caught the gleam of his white teeth, passed
on into the dancing-house, sat down on a divan, and called for coffee.
I could not take my eyes from him. Every movement he made fascinated me.
He drew from his pale blue robe a silver box, opened it, lifted out a
pinch of tobacco, and began carefully to roll a cigarette. And all the
time he smiled.

"A glacial cold crept over my body. As he lit his cigarette I caught
hold of Safti, and hurried through the doorway into the blackness of the
whirling sand."

*****

Here I stopped.

"Well?" said young England. "Well?"

The doctor did not speak.

"Well," I answered. "Algia danced that night. While she was dancing
we found a dead body in the court. It was Marnier's. A knife had been
thrust into him from behind!"

"Ah!" said the doctor.

"But--" exclaimed young England, "it was that fellow? It was Batouch?"

I shrugged my shoulders.

"Nobody ever found out who did it."

"Well, but of course----"

He checked himself, and an expression of admiration dawned slowly over
his healthy, handsome face.

"I say," he said, "to be able to roll a cigarette directly afterwards!
What infernal cheek!"

"Desert air!" I replied. "My dear chap--desert air!"

The doctor nodded.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Desert Air, by Robert Hichens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESERT AIR ***

***** This file should be named 23418-8.txt or 23418-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23418/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
